THE ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES
admirably balanced mind. He was, I take it, the most perfect
I had seen little of Holmes lately. My marriage had drifted us
of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee,
his tall, spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against


have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round
successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you
"Then how many are there?"
"There will call upon you to-night, at a quarter to eight
What do you deduce from it?"

triumphant cloud from his cigarette.
bell. Holmes whistled.
"Never mind him. I may want your help, and so may he. Here he
the deep blue cloak which was thrown over his shoulders was lined
strongly marked German accent. "I told you that I would call." He
back into my chair. "It is both, or none," said he. "You may say
you, and I may confess at once that the title by which I have
lounging figure of the man who had been no doubt depicted to him
before I was aware that I was addressing Wilhelm Gottsreich
lengthy visit to Warsaw, I made the acquaintance of the well-known
London--quite so! Your Majesty, as I understand, became entangled
produce her letters for blackmailing or other purposes, how is
"My photograph."
"It must be recovered."


go--none."

to have that photograph."
"Is Briony Lodge, Serpentine Avenue, St. Johns Wood."

inextricable mysteries. So accustomed was I to his invariable
until he was obliged to lie back, limp and helpless, in the
them, and you will know all that there is to know. I soon found
fills of shag tobacco, and as much information as I could desire
the advantages of a cabman as a confidant. They had driven him
inquiry. I fear that I bore you with these details, but I have to
glimpses of him in the windows of the sitting-room, pacing up and
but she was a lovely woman, with a face that a man might die for.
steaming horses were in front of the door when I arrived. I paid

to wear it on my watch-chain in memory of the occasion."



"Yes."
Your task is confined to that. When you raise your cry of fire,

being lighted as we paced up and down in front of Briony Lodge,
Norton, as our client is to its coming to the eyes of his
I am inclined to think neither. Women are naturally secretive,

loafer, who had rushed up with the same intention. A fierce
superb figure outlined against the lights of the hall, looking

to me. I hardened my heart, and took the smoke-rocket from under
of the street, and in ten minutes was rejoiced to find my
"She showed me, as I told you she would."

the Arnsworth Castle business. A married woman grabs at her baby;

the King without delay."




"Indeed! My mistress told me that you were likely to call. She
her flight. Holmes rushed at the bell-pull, tore back a small
suspicious, I found it hard to think evil of such a dear, kind
peace. I love and am loved by a better man than he. The King may
"From what I have seen of the lady she seems indeed to be on a
"Your Majesty has something which I should value even more
chambers.
very stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman with fiery red hair.
helper in many of my most successful cases, and I have no

be right. Now, Mr. Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call
slight indication of the course of events, I am able to guide
tradesman, obese, pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy grey
writing lately, I can deduce nothing else."

study of tattoo marks and have even contributed to the literature
"Yes, I have got it now," he answered with his thick red finger
"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated after I had twice
"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock
all, if he is satisfied, why should I put ideas in his head?"

"Why, says he, heres another vacancy on the League of the


"But, said I, there would be millions of red-headed men who
to me that if there was to be any competition in the matter I
were--straw, lemon, orange, brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay;
"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs
fine. He took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and
and the folk all trooped away in different directions until there
maintenance. It is exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a
"Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson! said Vincent Spaulding.
"Is 4 pounds a week.
said I.
"Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you
at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of ink, and with a
after. Every morning I was there at ten, and every afternoon I
"To an end?"

will excuse my saying so, something just a little funny about it.





Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought
morning."
the most difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this
"Sarasate plays at the St. Jamess Hall this afternoon," he
story which we had listened to in the morning. It was a poky,
bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to step
deal in this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you
"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We

the afternoon he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect
power would rise to the level of intuition, until those who were
"Why serious?"
hand, turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the
Holmes that this smooth-faced pawnbrokers assistant was a
pea-jacket and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack.
are, if he wont mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical
be the man upon whom you wish to lay your hands."
Ive had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I
He has one positive virtue. He is as brave as a bulldog and as

knees upon the floor and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens,

"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is
light upon them, close in swiftly. If they fire, Watson, have no
done what I asked you, Jones?"
of the bank director. From my position I could look over the case
tearing sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon
rending cloth as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed
must compliment you."
"All right," said Jones with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would
John Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over
no doubt suggested to Clays ingenious mind by the colour of his
house which could account for such elaborate preparations, and
It was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the
"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that
problems help me to do so."
would not dare to conceive the things which are really mere

wife. There is half a column of print, but I know without
pinch of snuff, Doctor, and acknowledge that I have scored over
"It was from the reigning family of Holland, though the matter in
which has been referred to me from Marseilles, there is nothing
the bank, she hurried across the road, and we heard the sharp
loomed behind his small black figure like a full-sailed
all that?"
the ceiling.
too, for he is only five years and two months older than myself."
rambling and inconsequential narrative, but, on the contrary, he
upon an income of about 60 pounds."

was there I met Mr. Hosmer Angel."
came back again, and Mr. Hosmer Angel could not come to the house
wrote and said that it would be safer and better not to see each
"Where did he live, then?"
from me, but when they were typewritten he always felt that the
well dressed, very neat and plain, but his eyes were weak, just
said she would make it all right with him. I didnt quite like
Kings Cross, and we were to have breakfast afterwards at the St.
"Oh, no, sir! He was too good and kind to leave me so. Why, all
"But you have no notion as to what it could have been?"
money, or if he had married me and got my money settled on him,


For all the preposterous hat and the vacuous face, there was
her more interesting than her little problem, which, by the way,
it."
really done very well indeed. It is true that you have missed
to surprise her."
my friends incisive reasoning.
named Hosmer Angel. About five ft. seven in. in height;
"They are typewritten," I remarked.
instituted."
been called upon to fathom. Once only had I known him to fail, in
the bedside of the sufferer. It was not until close upon six

six. Come in!"
has troubled you about this little matter, for I think it is far

Mr. Windibank," Holmes continued. "I think of writing another
the door. "I let you know, then, that I have caught him!"
"I am very much afraid that it is not. But between ourselves,
made a serious difference. It was worth an effort to preserve it.
a moustache and a pair of bushy whiskers, sunk that clear voice
far as it would go if a real effect were to be produced. There
away by the old trick of stepping in at one door of a
"The law cannot, as you say, touch you," said Holmes, unlocking
ends on a gallows. The case has, in some respects, been not
typewriting his signature, which, of course, inferred that his
typewriter, and I wrote to the man himself at his business

"Will you go?"
few and simple, so that in less than the time stated I was in a
we were past Reading. Then he suddenly rolled them all into a
clue. The more featureless and commonplace a crime is, the more
some years ago to the old country. One of the farms which he
least. That is as much as I have been able to gather about the
William Crowder, a game-keeper in the employ of Mr. Turner. Both
saw, at the border of the wood and close by the lake, Mr.
blows of some heavy and blunt weapon. The injuries were such as
thoughtfully. "It may seem to point very straight to one thing,
"I am afraid," said I, "that the facts are so obvious that you

"What are they?"
least a most suspicious remark."
so far forgotten his filial duty as to bandy words with him, and
though there are one or two points in it which are suggestive.
had driven over to Ross with John Cobb, the groom. Shortly after
for my father was a man of a very violent temper. Seeing that his
he died?
"The Coroner: I am afraid that I must press it.
"Witness: It was.
"Witness: I was so disturbed and excited as I rushed out into


give him the sympathy of the jury; too much, if he evolved from
leather-leggings which he wore in deference to his rustic
in the sky. I have a caseful of cigarettes here which need
most lovely young women that I have ever seen in my life. Her
"I hope we may clear him, Miss Turner," said Sherlock Holmes.
"But he is right. Oh! I know that he is right. James never did
"And your father?" asked Holmes. "Was he in favour of such a
years back, but this has broken him down completely. He has taken
me."
are bound to disappoint? I am not over-tender of heart, but I

nature of the injuries reveal something to my medical instincts?
he met his fate. But what could it indicate? I cudgelled my

who had done it and was screening him or her, but I am convinced
imagine how maddening it must be to him to be upbraided for not
think that that bit of news has consoled young McCarthy for all
There was no rain, as Holmes had foretold, and the morning broke
have learned that he gave him Hatherley Farm rent free."
deduce something from that?"
all theories to the contrary are the merest moonshine."
desired to be led to the court-yard, from which we all followed
along the track which ran through the meadows, and so by way of
the red, jutting pinnacles which marked the site of the rich
or other trace. But how on earth--"
the fathers feet as he paced up and down. What is this, then? It
he followed a pathway through the wood until he came to the
"The murder was done with it."
"Is a tall man, left-handed, limps with the right leg, wears


"Look here, Watson," he said when the cloth was cleared "just sit
presuming that what the lad says is absolutely true."
Sherlock Holmes took a folded paper from his pocket and flattened
"It is wonderful!" I exclaimed.

"But his lameness?"
cigar. I have, as you know, devoted some attention to this, and
truly as if you had cut the cord which was hanging him. I see the
he was in the grip of some deadly and chronic disease.
is so. I know all about McCarthy."
"What?"
not use it unless it is absolutely needed."
then, hot-blooded and reckless, ready to turn my hand at
Lord that I had shot him then, but I spared him, though I saw his
Regent Street with hardly a coat to his back or a boot to his
wanted he must have, and whatever it was I gave him without
But as I listened to his talk all that was black and bitter in
was forced to go back to fetch the cloak which I had dropped in
dead, shall be safe with us."
months after our interview, but he is now dead; and there is
possessed in so high a degree, and which it is the object of
adventure of the Paradol Chamber, of the Amateur Mendicant
had set in with exceptional violence. All day the wind had
Street.
came a step in the passage and a tapping at the door. He
"I owe you an apology," he said, raising his golden pince-nez to


"It is no ordinary one."
towards the blaze.
"My uncle Elias emigrated to America when he was a young man and
exercise, though very often for weeks on end he would never leave
his privacy. There was one singular exception, however, for he
laugh at this, but the laugh was struck from my lips at the sight
which must have belonged to the attic, in one hand, and a small
"I wish you, John, said my uncle, to witness my will. I leave
and nothing happened to disturb the usual routine of our lives. I
"Well, to come to an end of the matter, Mr. Holmes, and not to
have the date of the reception by your uncle of the letter, and
been destroyed by Colonel Openshaw. For the rest, there was
envelope in one hand and five dried orange pips in the


from home to visit an old friend of his, Major Freebody, who is
murder. There were no signs of violence, no footmarks, no
this curse had passed away from the family, and that it had ended

"I have seen the police."

acted before this. You have no further evidence, I suppose, than
undoubtedly my uncles."

words as will carry conviction with them. Having done this, you
certainly do as you advise."
"That is well. To-morrow I shall set to work upon your case."

"But have you," I asked, "formed any definite conception as to
has thoroughly understood one link in a series of incidents
in a very precise fashion."
can get it if he wants it. Now, for such a case as the one which
and his successors. Did you remark the postmarks of those
Does that suggest anything?"
seven weeks represented the difference between the mail-boat which
"The papers which Openshaw carried are obviously of vital
"I never have."
but generally recognised shape--a sprig of oak-leaves in some
"You will observe," said Holmes, laying down the volume, "that
sinister result for C. Well, I think, Doctor, that we may let
foresee, a very busy day before me in looking into this case of
chill to my heart.
given, and, by the aid of the water-police, the body was


"Starving. It had escaped my memory. I have had nothing since
trade-mark upon them. It is well thought of!"

one of the states of the Union."

reaches Savannah the mail-boat will have carried this letter, and

pupils, all huddled in a chair, the wreck and ruin of a noble

and water, and sit here comfortably and tell us all about it. Or
farthest east of the City. Hitherto his orgies had always been
send him home in a cab within two hours if he were indeed at the
light of a flickering oil-lamp above the door I found the latch
thoughts and paying little heed to the words of his neighbour. At

"I tell you that it is Friday, man. Your wife has been waiting
fumes of the drug, and looking about for the manager. As I passed
turned his face half round to the company once more, subsided
say that you have thrown in your lot with me. If you will wait
Then, glancing quickly round, he straightened himself out and

"What! You do not mean bodies?"
"If I can be of use."

the clouds. Holmes drove in silence, with his head sunk upon his

nicely, and lived generally in good style. By degrees he made
than usual, remarking before he started that he had two important
"It is very clear."
in, he had on neither collar nor necktie.
sign of him there. In fact, in the whole of that floor there was
sitting-room and led into a small bedroom, which looked out upon
swimming, for the tide was at its very highest at the moment of
lives upon the second floor of the opium den, and who was
appearance, you see, is so remarkable that no one can pass him
"He is a cripple in the sense that he walks with a limp; but in
during which he might have communicated with his friend the
the hope that the ebbing tide might afford some fresh clue.
away into the river."
There is not an instant to be lost. He rushes to some secret
quiet and innocent one. There the matter stands at present, and
"We are on the outskirts of Lee," said my companion. "We have

that my companion shook his head and shrugged his shoulders.
possible for me to bring him out and associate him with this
been laid out, "I should very much like to ask you one or two
keenly down at him as he leaned back in a basket-chair.



"And you are sure that this is your husbands hand?"
chewing tobacco. And you have no doubt that it is your husbands
"No, no; it is, it is his very own writing!"
a trifle and yet be ignorant of his death?"
"And you were surprised to see him in Swandam Lane?"

room?"
"Had he ever showed any signs of having taken opium?"
until he had either fathomed it or convinced himself that his
between his lips, the smoke still curled upward, and the room was
a different man to the sombre thinker of the previous night.
"In the bathroom," he answered. "Oh, yes, I am not joking," he
flicking the horse on into a gallop. "I confess that I have been

"Yes. He was brought up and remanded for further inquiries."
saw him, you would agree with me that he needed it."
is!" He quietly shot back a panel in the upper part of the door
his eyes and forehead.
"Well, I dont know why not," said the inspector. "He doesnt
repulsive sneer to the face! A twitch brought away the tangled
charged with that unless they make a case of attempted suicide of
Sherlock Holmes sat down beside him on the couch and patted him

hair, and an appropriate dress, I took my station in the business
work at 2 pounds a week when I knew that I could earn as much in
could earn 700 pounds a year--which is less than my average
street, with her eyes fixed full upon me. I gave a cry of
constables up the stair, and a few minutes after I found, rather,


I had called upon my friend Sherlock Holmes upon the second
my results. The matter is a perfectly trivial one"--he jerked his
space of a few square miles. Amid the action and reaction of so

homeward down Tottenham Court Road. In front of him he saw, in
battered hat and a most unimpeachable Christmas goose."
knowing that even the smallest problems are of interest to me.

red silk, but was a good deal discoloured. There was no makers

"My dear Holmes!"

afford to buy so expensive a hat three years ago, and has had no
felt by daubing them with ink, which is a sign that he has not
wearer perspired very freely, and could therefore, hardly be in


of such purity and radiance that it twinkled like an electric
have read the advertisement about it in The Times every day

of Morcar upon the day of the robbery in order that he might
in the strongest terms. Evidence of a previous conviction for
characteristics with which I have bored you. So now we must set


in having every characteristic of the carbuncle, save that it is

"Very glad to see you. I dine at seven. There is a woodcock, I
Baker. It is a cold night, and I observe that your circulation is
ill-usage at the hands of fortune.
"To eat it!" Our visitor half rose from his chair in his
relics of my adventure," said he, "but beyond that I can hardly
gained property under his arm. "There are a few of us who
"Not particularly."
of the streets which runs down into Holborn. Holmes pushed open

that our inquiry may but confirm his guilt; but, in any case, we
companion.
"The landlord of the Alpha."
"Well then, I shant tell you. So now!"
opinion on a matter of fowls, and I have a fiver on it that the




whether we should reserve it for to-morrow. It is clear from what
it? Did I buy the geese off you?"
fellow." Striding through the scattered knots of people who
"My name is Sherlock Holmes. It is my business to know what other
Sherlock Holmes hailed a four-wheeler which was passing. "In that
step into the cab, and I shall soon be able to tell you
slippers before we settle this little matter of yours. Now, then!

impunity. Give him a dash of brandy. So! Now he looks a little

companions knees. "For Gods sake, have mercy!" he shrieked.
the goose into the open market? Tell us the truth, for there lies
what was the matter, and why I was so pale; but I told her that I
pocket. I was leaning against the wall at the time and looking at
matter. As I turned to speak to her the brute broke loose and

all the way to Kilburn. I told my pal what I had done, for he was

convulsive sobbing, with his face buried in his hands.


association with Holmes, when we were sharing rooms as bachelors
resentment, for I was myself regular in my habits.
follow it from the outset. I thought, at any rate, that I should
Holmes. This is my intimate friend and associate, Dr. Watson,
and figure were those of a woman of thirty, but her hair was shot

and he, poor fellow, can be of little aid. I have heard of you,
Watson. I can only say, madam, that I shall be happy to devote
heard, Mr. Holmes, that you can see deeply into the manifold
and Hampshire in the west. In the last century, however, four
afterwards returned to England a morose and disappointed man.
there seemed to be no obstacle to our happiness.

had no great pleasure in our lives. No servant would stay with
stepfather learned of the engagement when my sister returned and
being in the central block of the buildings. Of these bedrooms

just ask you whether you had heard it.
yourselves in at night?"
souls which are so closely allied. It was a wild night. The wind
moment her knees seemed to give way and she fell to the ground.

the alarm took place. That is important. And what conclusions did
"How about poison?"

whom I have known for many years, has done me the honour to ask
is opposite, and drove to Leatherhead, from whence I have come on
livid spots, the marks of four fingers and a thumb, were printed
we were to come to Stoke Moran to-day, would it be possible for

leaning back in his chair.

"I see many objections to any such theory."
seared with a thousand wrinkles, burned yellow with the sun, and
"I will do nothing of the kind. My stepdaughter has been here. I
My friend smiled.
swiftly forward, seized the poker, and bent it into a curve with
however, and I only trust that our little friend will not suffer
short of 1100 pounds, is now, through the fall in agricultural

"Look there!" said he.
"Theres the village," said the driver, pointing to a cluster of
Good-afternoon, Miss Stoner. You see that we have been as good as
"So it appears."
broken and blocked with wooden boards, while the roof was partly
"Exactly so. But I am now sleeping in the middle one."


silent, while his eyes travelled round and round and up and down,
"No, I never heard of her using it. We used always to get what we
"Wont it ring?"

round table, and a large iron safe were the principal things
"No. What a strange idea!"

I had never seen my friends face so grim or his brow so dark as

"You must confine yourself to your room, on pretence of a
the cause of this noise which has disturbed you."
"No, I do not think so. I think that there was probably some more
he shook his clinched fists at him. The trap drove on, and a few


ventilator is made, a cord is hung, and a lady who sleeps in the
relative position to the ventilator and to the rope--or so we may

through the gloom to guide us on our sombre errand.


the bed beside him. By it he laid the box of matches and the
one and two and three, and still we sat waiting silently for
"You see it, Watson?" he yelled. "You see it?"
had died away into the silence from which it rose.
beam of light upon the iron safe, the door of which was ajar.
diamond-shaped head and puffed neck of a loathsome serpent.
Such are the true facts of the death of Dr. Grimesby Roylott, of
explain the appearance which she had caught a hurried glimpse of
poison which could not possibly be discovered by any chemical


notice--that of Mr. Hatherleys thumb, and that of Colonel

from Paddington and were waiting in the consulting-room. I
same as you." And off he went, this trusty tout, without even
train this morning, and on inquiring at Paddington as to where I
instincts rose up against that laugh.
"Thats better!" said he. "And now, Doctor, perhaps you would
it was still bleeding, so I tied one end of my handkerchief very
"By no means."
I was very weak, but I have had a good deal to go through."
to come to my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, before you go to the
"Yes; I shall not feel easy until I have told my story."
sofa, placed a pillow beneath his head, and laid a glass of
expression which veiled his keen and eager nature, while I sat
business a dreary experience. To me it has been exceptionally so.
and chin, and the skin of his cheeks was drawn quite tense over
"Well, perhaps it is better that I should not tell you that just
"If I promise to keep a secret, said I, you may absolutely
"Very good. He suddenly sprang up, and darting like lightning
is of value. Heaven forgive me for that last sentence, but the
"Precisely so. We shall want you to come to-night by the last

young and unknown man, a fee which would buy an opinion from the
eavesdroppers?
very much larger ones upon the right and left--both of them,
little house, it would soon rouse inquiry, and then, if the facts
trust you. He rose as he spoke. I shall expect you, then, at
and manner of my patron had made an unpleasant impression upon
word he grasped my arm and hurried me into a carriage, the door

were, but they were made of frosted glass, and I could make out
"It was pitch dark inside the house, and the colonel fumbled

clock ticking loudly somewhere in the passage, but otherwise
was standing in the aperture, the darkness of the hall behind
"It is not worth your while to wait, she went on. You can pass
cared to confess, I still shook my head and declared my intention
"On the contrary, said I, I opened the door myself because I
know what is wrong with it.

have the goodness to look it over and to show us how we can set
had made it clear to them, I returned to the main chamber of the
that which he had told me. I was admiring your fullers-earth,
"And then suddenly in the silence I heard a sound which sent my
think of that dreadful snap. Easier the other way, perhaps; and
how narrow had been my escape.
reached it we heard the sound of running feet and the shouting of
wholesome the garden looked in the moonlight, and it could not be
pass, I say! He dashed her to one side, and, rushing to the
rose-bushes.
during those dreadful hours might have been an evil dream.
bring me along here. I put the case into your hands and shall do

Bradstreet, of Scotland Yard, a plain-clothes man, and myself.
been lifted and conveyed somewhere."
"Really, now!" cried the inspector, "you have formed your
you give your casting vote to?"
"Indeed, it is a likely ruse enough," observed Bradstreet
But the inspector was mistaken, for those criminals were not

hastening in the direction of the fire. The road topped a low
your friends of last night, though I very much fear that they are
About sunset, however, their efforts were at last successful, and
unusually large ones. On the whole, it was most probable that the

It was a few weeks before my own marriage, during the days when I
"Your morning letters, if I remember right, were from a


may place implicit reliance upon your judgment and discretion. I

They inherit Plantagenet blood by direct descent, and Tudor on

free-trade principle appears to tell heavily against our home
and as Lord St. Simon has no property of his own save the small
taken place, and that the honeymoon would be passed at Lord
"Yes; it struck me as being a little out of the common."
greatest consternation by the strange and painful episodes which
Whittington. The whole party proceeded afterwards to the house of
apparelled, but had refused to credit that it was his mistress,

Watson, and as the clock makes it a few minutes after four, I
foppishness, with high collar, black frock-coat, white waistcoat,
society."
affairs of my other clients the same secrecy which I promise to
offer an opinion. I think that I may arrive at my facts most
"No."

cough--"had not I thought her to be at bottom a noble woman. I

wedding?"
"And did you observe any change in her then?"
way home, she seemed absurdly agitated over this trifling cause."
cheerful frame of mind than she had gone to it. What did she do


morning."
Mr. Dorans door just after we returned, and she endeavoured to
so serious. It is thought that Flora decoyed my wife out and laid
"Well, really, I came to seek a theory, not to propound one. I
nearly all my data. May I ask whether you were seated at the
"I say that I have solved it."

cases--but, hullo, here is Lestrade! Good-afternoon, Lestrade!
"Really! You surprise me."

the matter?"
"No. They were found floating near the margin by a park-keeper.
many minutes. This dress does implicate Miss Flora Millar."
"Very good, Lestrade," said Holmes, laughing. "You really are
"The right side? Youre mad! Here is the note written in pencil
hard work and not in sitting by the fire spinning fine theories.
his overcoat. "There is something in what the fellow says about
for and were ordered to this address.
It was indeed our visitor of the afternoon who came bustling in,
the family has been subjected to such humiliation?"
"You must make allowance for this poor girl, placed in so
seat and stood very erect, with his eyes cast down and his hand
didnt know what I was doing or saying. I only wonder I didnt
but then one day father struck a rich pocket and made a pile,
that we just did it right there; and then Frank went off to seek

tell me to be still. Then I saw him scribble on a piece of paper,
the road. He beckoned to me and then began walking into the Park.

secret. Then he offered to give us a chance of talking to Lord
"Oh, certainly, if it would give you any pleasure." He put out
American, Mr. Moulton, for I am one of those who believe that the

possess so much influence over her? It might be a lover; it might
"It might have been difficult, but friend Lestrade held
had seen in the duplicate bill. His letters were to be forwarded
fortune. I think that we may judge Lord St. Simon very mercifully
in the pockets of his dressing-gown, looking over my shoulder. It
hat, neat brown gaiters, and well-cut pearl-grey trousers. Yet

Sherlock Holmes pushed him down into the easy-chair and, sitting
"I see that you have had some great trouble," responded Holmes.
"My name," answered our visitor, "is probably familiar to your
snow. That is why I was so out of breath, for I am a man who
card was brought in to me by one of the clerks. I started when I
50,000 pounds at once. I could, of course, borrow so trifling a
rather more than it could bear. If, on the other hand, I am to do
he, and the price of the gold chasing is incalculable. The
pure matter of form. Is the security sufficient?

been forced before now, and why should not mine be? If so, how
months. She came with an excellent character, however, and has
meant it for the best.

when my brother died five years ago and left her alone in the
"When we were taking coffee in the drawing-room that night after
"It is locked up, I answered.
"You have been very kind, said he, but I must have this money,
treasure was safe, and locked it again. Then I started to go
it is hardly safe and should be stopped.

"The gas was half up, as I had left it, and my unhappy boy,


national property. I was determined that the law should have its
"You may as well face the matter, said I; you have been caught
you to implore you to use your skill in unravelling the matter.

"This matter, from what you say, seems to have been a shock to
"Do you not think, then, that he might have been trying to
"A likely story! As if a man bent on felony would slam his door
to be a simple case; to me it seems exceedingly complex. Consider
you please, Mr. Holder, we will set off for Streatham together,
which had been presented to him, and he even broke into a
front, down the tradesmens path, and so round by the garden

"How could I help suspecting him, when I actually saw him with
"No, his friend. He wished us to leave him alone. He is round in
"You heard nothing yourself last night?"
to your uncle last night that she had been out to see him?"





"I confess that I still share my uncles perplexity."
heavy with snow and his features as inscrutable as ever.
"Then, for Gods sake, what was this dark business which was
It was obvious to me that my companions mind was now made up
shall soon know which it is. I hope that I may be back in a few
before I get back. Dont wait up for me in case I should be
hastened upstairs, and a few minutes later I heard the slam of

age. One sorrow comes close upon the heels of another. My niece,
mind, ever again be happy under your roof, and I feel that I must



"For heavens sake, tell me, then, what is this extraordinary
desperate villain, a man without heart or conscience. Your niece
coronet. His wicked lust for gold kindled at the news, and he
slipped on some clothes and waited there in the dark to see what
right. He rushed down, just as he was, in his bare feet, opened
"You then roused his anger by calling him names at a moment when
the snow which might help me. I knew that none had fallen since
front of me.
another little smudge of blood showed that it was he who had been
far I was clear. The question now was, who was the man and who
"And who could it be who was her confederate? A lover evidently,
the expense of six shillings, made all sure by buying a pair of
clapped a pistol to his head before he could strike. Then he
skill has indeed exceeded all that I have heard of it. And now I
Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily
records."

the table had not been cleared yet. Sherlock Holmes had been
outside the pale of the law. But in avoiding the sensational, I
bottom at last, however. This note I had this morning marks my
"Not I."
She was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face,
fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and
really managed by Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office,
hands together in the most genial fashion. He was such a
Munro.
why, then, how could any gentleman ask you to condescend to
"It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and so
"One child--one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if
always that they were such commands as a lady might with
"Oh, no.
ladies fancies must be consulted. And so you wont cut your
"Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books? she asked.
at least ready to pay for their eccentricity. Very few
you. We are willing to give 30 pounds a quarter, or 120 pounds a
meet you with the dog-cart at Winchester. Let me know your train.

nice household for a young lady."
come my way for some months. There is something distinctly novel
good-night and bustled off upon her way.
the man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond
and then, glancing at the message, threw it across to me.

which set an edge to a mans energy. All over the countryside,
isolation and of the impunity with which crime may be committed
lane so vile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of

awaited us upon the table.
"In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole,
a hundred yards from the front door. This ground in front belongs
Rucastle told me in private that the reason why she had left them
saddest look upon her face. More than once I have surprised her

very quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after
and Mrs. Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which
the nursery.
be. They were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face
lowered my handkerchief and glanced at Mrs. Rucastle to find her
"Surely it would be better to take no notice.
which I speak. On the very first day that I was at the Copper
anything with him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then,
jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting bones. It walked slowly
so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The very
locked.
"This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the

feeling that some good might come from my penetrating to this
opened the door, and slipped through.
a skylight which let in light from above. As I stood in the
"Oh, I am so frightened! I panted.

demon--Ill throw you to the mastiff.
remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of
his pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon

"I will do it."
laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your gesture,
derives this from his smiling father, as I should suspect, or
reached the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside
business."
strength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There

"You villain!" said he, "wheres your daughter?"
down the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we
carried him, living but horribly mangled, into the house. We laid

after she met Mr. Fowler at a friends house. As well as I could
to tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce

questionable one."

at the breakfast table. I stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the
of your head.”
“I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country
presentation in return.”
system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval. He now took
erroneous. When I said that you stimulated me I meant, to be frank, that
themselves.”

hold such a position, and such a one would not drift into the country.
man’s age and professional career.” From my small medical shelf I took
smile, “but a country doctor, as you very astutely observed. I think
curly-haired spaniel.”


“Yes, sir. I married, and so left the hospital, and with it all hopes of

The man drew out paper and tobacco and twirled the one up in the other
“Indeed, sir! May I inquire who has the honour to be the first?” asked


as did eventually overtake him.”

        line from Hugo Baskerville, and as I had the story from
        Baskerville was held by Hugo of that name, nor can it be
        brought her to the Hall the maiden was placed in an upper
        guests to carry food and drink--with other worse things,
        line, and so off full cry in the moonlight over the moor.
        “They had gone a mile or two when they passed one of the
        followed over the moor, though each, had he been alone,
        set by certain forgotten peoples in the days of old.
        very night of what he had seen, and the other twain were
        crossing the moor in those dark hours when the powers of

        for Mid-Devon at the next election, has cast a gloom over
        large were those schemes of reconstruction and improvement
        Sir Charles was a widower, and a man who may be said to
        was in the habit every night before going to bed of walking
        it was at the far end of it that his body was discovered.
        which is not unusual in cases of dyspnoea and death from
        in America, and inquiries are being instituted with a

“The moor is very sparsely inhabited, and those who live near each other
you, Mr. Holmes, he was honestly convinced that a dreadful fate overhung
calf passing at the head of the drive. So excited and alarmed was he
distractions of town would send him back a new man. Mr. Stapleton, a
such an extent that I could hardly have sworn to his identity. There was
“Mr. Holmes, they were the footprints of a gigantic hound!”
“You saw this?”

“But not actually raining?”
“Yes, the wicket-gate which leads on to the moor.”
“Now, tell me, Dr. Mortimer--and this is important--the marks which you
“How high was it?”


“Why do you hesitate?”

Holmes shrugged his shoulders. “I have hitherto confined my
“Then, how can I assist you?”
“None. The only other kinsman whom we have been able to trace was Rodger
who goes there meets with an evil fate. I feel sure that if Sir Charles

“I recommend, sir, that you take a cab, call off your spaniel who is



clay pipe between his lips. Several rolls of paper lay around him.



a house indicated here which may be the residence of the
“The devil’s agents may be of flesh and blood, may they not? There are
“What do you make of it?”

direction where help was least likely to be. Then, again, whom was he
the contrary, the evidence is that he avoided the moor. That night he
dressing-gown for the promised interview. Our clients were punctual to
little puzzles, and I’ve had one this morning which wants more thinking
“Who knew that you were going to the Northumberland Hotel?” asked
words upon it. It ran:

extract from it.


“I presume, Doctor, that you could tell the skull of a negro from that
expert in crime, though I confess that once when I was very young I

but those of the highly educated. We may take it, therefore, that
“We are coming now rather into the region of guesswork,” said Dr.
seldom allowed to be in such a state, and the combination of the two
as we can from this curious letter; and now, Sir Henry, has anything
“I think anything out of the ordinary routine of life well worth

at once and bought a pair of boots?”
driving at.”
uncle’s death--well, it all seems boiling up in my head, and I can’t
“Or it may be that they wish, for their own purposes, to scare me away.”
“Well, that is what we have to find out.”

the man of action.
us by about half. Then, still keeping a hundred yards behind, we
the driver, and the cab flew madly off down Regent Street. Holmes looked

hopes of marking down their invisible attendant. So wily was he that he
that is no use to us for the moment.”
conversation, and Dr. Mortimer, with his companion, had long vanished in
warmly greeted by the manager.
of this five-pound note.”



asked me to show you up at once when you came.”
not older than yourself.”
established a most important fact by these questions, Watson,” he
Western dialect than any which we had heard from him in the morning.

manager and tell him that I go right straight out of this hotel.”
“I just don’t attempt to explain it. It seems the very maddest, queerest
We had a pleasant luncheon in which little was said of the business
do you a mischief, and we should be powerless to prevent it. You did not

Barrymore, anyhow?”

of public charities. The residue all went to Sir Henry.”
happened to our young friend here--you will forgive the unpleasant
thousands.”
“Quite so. Well, Sir Henry, I am of one mind with you as to the
and with the constant appeals which reach me from many quarters, it is
“Well, now, that is real kind of you, Dr. Watson,” said he. “You see how


Sir Charles’s death, we had a line of inexplicable incidents all within
The second:
The ring at the bell proved to be something even more satisfactory

detective and that I was to say nothing about him to anyone.”


Street and along--”

“No, sir; nothing.”
got a foeman who is worthy of our steel. I’ve been checkmated in London.

case, and especially the relations between young Baskerville and his
giving up all chance of bringing it home to them. No, no, we will

“Except yesterday afternoon. I usually give up one day to pure amusement
“Indeed. That is very interesting. Well, good-bye,” he added as the
eagerly out of the window and cried aloud with delight as he recognized

read upon his eager face how much it meant to him, this first sight of
and porters clustered round us to carry out our luggage. It was a sweet,
mottled bramble gleamed in the light of the sinking sun. Still steadily
A steep curve of heath-clad land, an outlying spur of the moor, lay in

with gnarled and craggy cairns and tors. A cold wind swept down from
a cuplike depression, patched with stunted oaks and firs which had been
again hushed amid the leaves, and the old trees shot their branches in a
of the hall door.”
A tall man had stepped from the shadow of the porch to open the door of
The wheels died away down the drive while Sir Henry and I turned

made your fresh arrangements, but you will understand that under the new
connection.”
A square balustraded gallery ran round the top of the old hall,
an old-time banquet, it might have softened; but now, when two
I drew aside my curtains before I went to bed and looked out from my
I sat up in bed and listened intently. The noise could not have been
at breakfast the sunlight flooded in through the high mullioned windows,
“That is curious, for I did when I was half asleep fancy that I heard

impression might easily have been erroneous. How could I settle the
Barrymore exactly as directed.”
“Did you see Mr. Barrymore?”
agent of others or had he some sinister design of his own? What interest


Henry has, I suppose, no superstitious fears in the matter?”


follows that Mr. Sherlock Holmes is interesting himself in the matter,
advice.”

so barren, and so mysterious.”
“It would be a rare place for a gallop.”
ponies!”
have found them out.”
it.”
prey. I’ve heard it once or twice before, but never quite so loud.”
“Well, perhaps it was. Did you ever hear a bittern booming?”

“He grazed his cattle on these slopes, and he learned to dig for tin
found a woman near me upon the path. She had come from the direction in
eyes were on her brother as I turned, and then she quickened her pace
“But I have only just come.”
“Well, Jack, you are very hot.”

A short walk brought us to it, a bleak moorland house, once the farm
Beryl?”
sister is as devoted to Nature as I am. All this, Dr. Watson, has been
“I am sure that he would be delighted.”
not doubt that some grave and deep reason lay behind it. I resisted



“I would ask you one more question, Miss Stapleton. If you meant no

and telegrams have kept you pretty well up to date as to all that has
imagine that they were some unwarlike and harried race who were forced
One of these, concerning which I have said little, is the escaped
There are one maid, an old manservant, the sister, and the brother, the
approbation for what she said. I trust that he is kind to her. There is
than once whether he did really believe in the possibility of the
here tonight, and there is some talk of our going to them next week. One
He has been excavating a barrow at Long Down and has got a prehistoric
black, silent, and monstrous? Was there a human agency in the matter?
trespass. He is learned in old manorial and communal rights, and he
a grave without the consent of the next of kin because he dug up the
had Barrymore up and asked him whether he had received the telegram

memory which haunts her, and sometimes I suspect Barrymore of being a
appearance.
rigid with expectation as he stared out into the blackness of the moor.

ways they have become more complicated. But I will tell you all and you
have accounted for his stealthy movements and also for the uneasiness
“I knew that Barrymore walked about nights, and I had a mind to speak

there are pretty clear signs that this will not be wanting if the lady
“That depends on whether you are going on the moor,” said I.
It put me in a most awkward position. I was at a loss what to say or
all, I mounted a hill from which I could command a view--the same hill
threatened him I was too far away to be of use, and yet I am sure that
hurriedly round. Stapleton was the cause of the interruption. He was
have witnessed so intimate a scene without my friend’s knowledge. I ran
countryside seems to have been out to see me do my wooing--and a mighty
can take it from me that either he or I ought to be in a straitjacket.
few weeks, but from the first I just felt that she was made for me,
lady? How dared I offer her attentions which were distasteful to her?
it be this dark fate which runs in his family. That his advances should

all opposition upon his part if I would promise for three months to let
things have by one night’s work been thoroughly cleared.
the alert once more. We had heard the creak of a step in the passage.
fortunately rather deaf, and he was entirely preoccupied in that which
“Nothing, sir.” His agitation was so great that he could hardly speak,

trees and the lighter expanse of the moor, for the moon was behind the
The man’s face became openly defiant. “It is my business, and not yours.


that he could do what he liked in it. Then as he grew older he met
as he was there we could not desert him. That is the whole truth, as I


this which made Sir Henry so keen upon the adventure.
“Are you armed?” I asked.
moan in which it died away. Again and again it sounded, the whole air
told of the sudden horror which had seized him.

the truth.”
but that sound seemed to freeze my very blood. Feel my hand!”



attacked and not to shoot an unarmed man who was running away.
statue on that shining background, I saw the figure of a man upon the
distance away. The baronet’s nerves were still quivering from that cry,
be of most service to you in helping you to your conclusions. We are

black reaction after the excitements of the night. I am conscious myself
quality upon earth it is common sense, and nothing will persuade me to
remained in London, or has he followed us down here? Could he--could he
wisest one is to play my own game and speak as little as possible to

moor, and he is a fellow who would stick at nothing. You only want to

“I guess we are aiding and abetting a felony, Watson? But, after what
“No, sir, I don’t know that.”
“How do you know this, Barrymore?”
part of it was charred to pieces, but one little slip, the end of a

“You thought it might injure his reputation?”
“Let Holmes know all about it at once. It will give him the clue for
suffered something to atone for them. And then I thought of that other
was there any trace of that lonely man whom I had seen on the same spot
you do not know?”
“She is Frankland’s daughter.”
deserved one could not allow her to go hopelessly to the bad. Her story
I have not lived for years with Sherlock Holmes for nothing.
food for him last, and that was three days ago.”


stranger hiding out yonder, and watching and waiting! What’s he waiting

earnest purpose can he have which calls for such a trial! There, in that
strange events began to move swiftly towards their terrible conclusion.
cards until it was very late. At breakfast, however, I informed him
visit.
“I have the pleasure,” said I, “of knowing your father.”


“Have you ever met him?”


wrote it?”
“Do you think a woman could go alone at that hour to a bachelor’s

innocent, why did you in the first instance deny having written to Sir
“I quoted the postscript. The letter had, as I said, been burned and it
The law is upon his side, and every day I am faced by the possibility
morning.”
the more I thought of the lady’s face and of her manner the more I felt
the Black Tor. That, then, should be the centre of my search. From there
which I travelled.
here who does not fear to invoke it. I have established a right of way
verdict.”

I stared. “You don’t mean that you know where he is?” said I.
mind.

opinion. I have seen the boy again and again with his bundle. Every
“Quick, Dr. Watson, quick, before he passes over the hill!”

of energy or perseverance that I should miss the chance which fortune
weather. My heart leaped within me as I saw it. This must be the burrow
was certainly where the man lived. Some blankets rolled in a waterproof

must be of Spartan habits and cared little for the comforts of life.
interview which every instant was bringing nearer. With tingling nerves

“Come out,” said he, “and please be careful with the revolver.”

into the empty hut.”

“Exactly.”
bitterness. “I think that I have deserved better at your hands, Holmes.”

“Here are your reports, my dear fellow, and very well thumbed, I assure
I am already aware that she is the one person in Coombe Tracey who might
“I did not know of a close intimacy.”
“Sir Henry’s falling in love could do no harm to anyone except Sir

“Because he so far forgot himself as to tell you a true piece of

upon the moor. A few faint stars were gleaming in a violet sky.
justified itself, and yet I could almost wish that you had not left his
The cry had been loud on account of its vehemence, but it had pealed out

“No, no, surely not!”

and upon the ghastly pool which widened slowly from the crushed skull
rounded and complete, I have thrown away the life of my client. It is
existence of the latter, since Sir Henry has evidently died from the

“We must send for help, Holmes! We cannot carry him all the way to the
the beetling forehead, the sunken animal eyes. It was indeed the same
probability--and so ran this man down. There is one very singular thing,

audacious! Not a word to show your suspicions--not a word, or my plans

“Because I had suggested that he should come over. When he did not come
“We heard nothing of the kind,” said I.
“We have been expecting you in these parts since Dr. Watson came down.

return alone. Looking back we saw the figure moving slowly away over the
the wrong man had fallen a victim to his plot. I told you in London,
“Why should we not arrest him at once?”
“There is Sir Charles’s death.”
man’s trail. There is a complete absence of motive. No, my dear fellow;
“Are you coming up?”
Sir Henry was more pleased than surprised to see Sherlock Holmes, for he
morning,” said the baronet. “I guess I should have some credit, for I

“We’ve had one experience, as Watson has no doubt told you. We heard the

“Excuse the admiration of a connoisseur,” said he as he waved his hand

“And this Cavalier opposite to me--the one with the black velvet and the

“Is it like anyone you know?”

rare fits of laughter as he turned away from the picture. I have not
Selden. I think I can promise that none of you will be troubled in the


regarded as our desertion.
“All right, then, I’ll stay.”

go with him, nor could I understand how we could both be absent at a

while we should actually return at the instant when we were likely to
“You have confessed that you asked Sir Charles to be at the gate at ten


told me. And why--why? I imagined that all was for my own sake. But now

nothing until you read the reports of the death in the paper?”
“I knew him,” she said. “But if he had kept faith with me I should
‘66, and of course there are the Anderson murders in North Carolina, but

defect--was that he was exceedingly loath to communicate his full plans
Our conversation was hampered by the presence of the driver of the hired

but Holmes halted us when we were about two hundred yards from it.

distrait. Perhaps the thought of that lonely walk across the ill-omened
“You say, Watson, that the lady is not there?” Holmes asked when I had
was turned towards it, and he muttered impatiently as he watched its
bristling chimneys hard outlined against the silver-spangled sky. Broad
passionately upon the rock in front of us and stamped his feet in his
being overtaken before he can reach us. At all costs we must hold our

a disordered brain could anything more savage, more appalling, more
am reckoned fleet of foot, but he outpaced me as much as I outpaced the
thrust his brandy-flask between the baronet’s teeth, and two frightened
gleamed in the darkness.
anything. So! Now, if you will help me up. What do you propose to do?”
must have told him that the game was up.”
this door!”
old worm-eaten baulk of timber which spanned the roof. To this post a

“Thank God! Thank God! Oh, this villain! See how he has treated me!”
he kept his hound and there also he had made preparations so that he
today. Then indeed you would have had him at your mercy!”
surmises which clouded our lives so long and ended in so tragic a
tugging us down into those obscene depths, so grim and purposeful was
upon the track. He fled when he knew the game was up, still clutching
Many traces we found of him in the bog-girt island where he had hid his
risk, and it was only on the supreme day, which he regarded as the end

of murder which hung over her in connection with the death of her
the man who called himself Stapleton was simple and direct, although
is able to argue with an expert upon his own subject finds that a week
Garcia, one of the beauties of Costa Rica, and, having purloined a
“We now come to that portion of his life which has proved to be of such
knew that the old man’s heart was weak and that a shock would kill him.
insect hunts learned to penetrate the Grimpen Mire, and so had found a


its lair in the Grimpen Mire, and a mystery was left which puzzled
nothing to fear from them. The first half of his task was successfully
he, disguised in a beard, followed Dr. Mortimer to Baker Street and
in his design. By chance, however, the first boot which was procured for
years there have been four considerable burglaries in the west country,
of events correctly, but there is one point which you have left
Mire by the path which Stapleton had marked out. It is very probable,
lady, and already my thoughts began to turn towards the Stapletons. Thus
was able to keep my hand upon all the strings.
in the death of the unfortunate convict did not help us much in proving

to Merripit House and that he would sooner or later get the opportunity
not condone such an injury so lightly. And now, my dear Watson, without
could he claim it without causing suspicion and inquiry?”
work, and for one evening, I think, we may turn our thoughts into more

upon the sinewy forearm and wrist all dotted and scarred with
him.
upon it."
some extent answerable."

He shook his head sadly.  "I glanced over it," said he. "Honestly, I
I was annoyed at this criticism of a work which had been specially
range of exact knowledge which is essential to the higher developments
qualities necessary for the ideal detective.  He has the power of
been done by a man who was smoking an Indian lunkah, it obviously
hobby."
have mentioned it to no one."
"Why, of course I knew that you had not written a letter, since I sat
"I have heard you say that it is difficult for a man to have any object


I sprang from my chair and limped impatiently about the room with
"Then how in the name of all that is wonderful did you get these facts?
objects, such as coins or keys, in the same pocket.  Surely it is no
not have redeemed the pledge. Finally, I ask you to look at the inner
the street and drifts across the dun-colored houses.  What could be

and sympathetic.  In an experience of women which extends over many
"She did not think so.  But at least you cannot say the same of mine.

news of him.  That night, on the advice of the manager of the hotel, I
clue,--some clothes, some books, and a considerable number of
appeared in the Times asking for the address of Miss Mary Morstan and
anything else occurred to you?"

will do, I suppose?"
the same person. I should not like to suggest false hopes, Miss

a philanthropist who has spent nearly a quarter of a million upon the
illegibly they may write.  There is vacillation in his ks and
surgeon with a weak leg and a weaker banking-account, that I should

"No?  You surprise me.  Look at it in this way, then.  Captain Morstan
too much to suppose that her father is still alive.  There is no other
feel some uneasiness at the strange enterprise upon which we were
"It is paper of native Indian manufacture," he remarked.  "It has at
use to us.  I begin to suspect that this matter may turn out to be much
There was, to my mind, something eerie and ghost-like in the endless
shirt-fronted men and beshawled, bediamonded women.  We had hardly
He gave a shrill whistle, on which a street Arab led across a
anecdote as to how a musket looked into my tent at the dead of night,
lamps shining upon the broad, silent water; but our cab dashed on, and
was as dark as its neighbors, save for a single glimmer in the kitchen
The Story of the Bald-Headed Man

silver dove was hung from an almost invisible golden wire in the centre
I listened to his heart, as requested, but was unable to find anything

I nodded to show my agreement.
disregard my request and bring unpleasant people with you. I took the
"You will excuse me, Mr. Sholto," said Miss Morstan, "but I am here at
He laughed until his ears were quite red.  "That would hardly do," he
"I very well remember the sensation which was caused by the
wooden-legged man, who proved to be a harmless tradesman canvassing for
heavily.  He besought us to lock the door and to come upon either side
send her nothing--not even the chaplet--until I am gone. After all, men
I found, to my horror, that he was dead.
have killed him.  Let us hide him away, and who is the wiser?" "I did
yelled, in a voice which I can never forget, Keep him out!  For
at work all round us.  The window of my fathers room was found open in
water which I quietly poured out for her from a Venetian carafe upon
judge the splendor of the missing riches by the chaplet which he had
Bartholomew could not altogether see it in that light.  We had plenty
which the mysterious business had taken.  Holmes was the first to
face.  "My health is somewhat fragile," he remarked, as he led the way
between, which he ascertained by borings, he could not bring the total
heavy as lead within me.  I stammered out some few halting words of
as he handed her out.

"That you, Mr. Thaddeus?  But who are the others?  I had no orders
"Very sorry, Mr. Thaddeus," said the porter, inexorably.  "Folk may be



admit him, and sway with pleasure at the very sight of him.
go out to her so, and, as she has often told me, there was in her also
At that moment the door of the house burst open, and Thaddeus Sholto
left-hand side of the passage.  The old woman was pacing up and down
and peeped through the key-hole.  You must go up, Mr. Thaddeus,--you
The third flight of stairs ended in a straight passage of some length,
I stooped to the hole, and recoiled in horror.  Moonlight was streaming
"The door must come down," he answered, and, springing against it, he
to pass through.  At the foot of the steps a long coil of rope was

I took it up between my finger and thumb.  It came away from the skin
"The treasure is gone!" he said.  "They have robbed him of the
his hand upon his shoulder.  "Take my advice, and drive down to the
you, almost complete; but we must not err on the side of
mounted by the window. It rained a little last night.  Here is the
efficient ally.  Could you scale that wall, doctor?"
and get away in the way that he originally came.  As a minor point it
of crime in this country,--though parallel cases suggest themselves
know that he could not have been concealed in the room, as there is no
lath-and-plaster between, so that in walking one had to step from beam
well defined, perfectly formed, but scarce half the size of those of an
instructive to compare results."


strychnine-like substance which would produce tetanus."
"Is that an English thorn?" he asked.
pretty business!  But who are all these?  Why, the house seems to be as
this?  Bad business!  Bad business!  Stern facts here,--no room for
then the jewels are missing.  Ha!  I have a theory. These flashes come
of mind.  His appearance is--well, not attractive.  You see that I am
here is a hole in the roof."  With great activity, considering his

"Dont trouble yourself about it, Mr. Sholto," said Holmes.  "I think
you, coupled with the fact that there is a good deal of skin missing
"I have just been thinking so," I answered.  "It is not right that Miss
over any mares-nest which he may choose to construct.  When you have
before three, if I can get a fresh horse."
Morstan back to her home.  After the angelic fashion of women, she had
Holmess researches were successful, she would be an heiress.  Was it
me to step in and tell her our adventures.  I explained, however, the
had had light upon all those events.  They had only led us, however, to
"Go on, you drunken vagabone," said the face.  "If you kick up any more
door was unbarred and open.  Mr. Sherman was a lanky, lean old man,
"Ah! that would be Toby."
naturalist handed to me, and, having thus sealed an alliance, it
and the Indian servant.  We have the place to ourselves, but for a
upon the footsteps in the dust.
"Your toes are all cramped together.  The other print has each toe
roof, and I could see him like an enormous glow-worm crawling very

"It was easy to follow him," he said, drawing on his stockings and

air, pattered off upon the trail at a pace which strained his leash and
loosened, and the crevices left were worn down and rounded upon the
smell of the creasote rose high above all other contending scents.
be deeper and more inexplicable.  How, for example, could you describe
association with convicts.  Jonathan Small did not get the treasure
what their term of imprisonment was.  It would not have been a surprise
Sholto lived, and very possibly he established communications with some
of the four associates, something in the nature of an act of justice.
creasote, whence comes Toby, and a six-mile limp for a half-pay officer
oven as the Andamans. His height is readily calculated from the length

and, having loaded two of the chambers, he put it back into the
We had traversed Streatham, Brixton, Camberwell, and now found

dog, frantic with excitement, turned down through the side-gate into

"Yes.  And, fortunately, we have no distance to go.  Evidently what

the hour or day."  A second inscription above the door informed us that
let us hear of it."
for me to manage, specially when my man is away days at a time."
far as Gravesend, and then if there was much doin there he might ha
you straight, sir, I dont feel easy in my mind about it."
"Couldnt say, I am sure, sir.  I didnt hear no one else."
him know that you are uneasy.  A black funnel, you say?"

not a bad fellow, and I should not like to do anything which would
Penitentiary.

however, was a different matter.  That, or part of it, belonged
ham and eggs first."
and was on the ground within half an hour of the first alarm.  His
occasions of a single vigorous and masterful mind.  We cannot but think
Hudson, our landlady, raising her voice in a wail of expostulation and
superiority which was very funny in such a disreputable little
moment you have news.  Is that all clear?"

Diminutive footmarks, toes never fettered by boots, naked feet,
are we to find our savage?"
be found who are very much smaller than this.  They are a fierce,

looking down upon me.

"Then I shall run over to Camberwell and call upon Mrs. Cecil
"All right!  Good luck!  But, I say, if you are crossing the river you
million in treasure, a black cannibal, and a wooden-legged ruffian.
"It is for Mr. Thaddeus Sholto that I am anxious," she said. "Nothing

upon his mind which makes him restless."  I tried to speak lightly to
everything; and yet I can get no news.  I have set other agencies at
start off myself to-morrow, and go for the men rather than the boat.
me that he was still engaged in his malodorous experiment.
about it last night. I want you to open all notes and telegrams, and to
it is quite impossible that Mr. Thaddeus Sholto could have been in any
"Lost.--Whereas Mordecai Smith, boatman, and his son, Jim, left Smiths
thoughts would wander off to our strange quest and to the ill-assorted

bandanna handkerchief.
through trap-doors.  Its a very dark case, and my professional credit
He took the telegram out of his pocket, and handed it to me.  It was
rattling as from a man who was sorely put to it for breath. Once or
He looked about him in the slow methodical fashion of old age.
"Then tell me, and I shall let him know."
until our friend returns."
resting on his hands.  Jones and I resumed our cigars and our talk.
an actor, and a rare one.  You had the proper workhouse cough, and
"It has all come to nothing.  I have had to release two of my

until after the official investigation."
"Perfectly.  Is there anything else?"
nervous exaltation.  I have never known him so brilliant.  He spoke on
pistol, Watson?"


landing-stage or wharf, nor had it returned.  Yet it could hardly have
"No, I hardly think so.  This lair of his would be too valuable a
cover of darkness to some ship at Gravesend or in the Downs, where no
change in her.  She would then be removed to his shed or yard, and so
He was rather the worse for liquor.  I should not, of course, have
down."
long series of bridges which span the Thames.  As we passed the City
is certainly ten to one that they go down-stream, but we cannot be
"Winwood Reade is good upon the subject," said Holmes.  "He remarks
She had slipped unseen through the yard-entrance and passed behind two
right and to left of us.  With every throb of the engines we sprang and

turned our search-light upon her, so that we could plainly see the
stern still crouched upon the deck, and his arms were moving as though
already drawn his revolver, and I whipped out mine at the sight of this
It was well that we had so clear a view of him.  Even as we looked he
into the sodden soil.  In vain he struggled and writhed.  Not one step
but there was no sign of the Islander.  Somewhere in the dark ooze at
Chapter XI
twinkling eyes at the box which had been the cause of his ill-doings.


seem a queer thing," he added, with a bitter smile, "that I who have a

condemning them."  It was amusing to notice how the consequential Jones
You will have to break it open.  Where is the key, my man?"
the obliging inspector in the cab.

she detected a hollow ring in my congratulations, for I saw her
wild chase down the Thames.  She listened with parted lips and shining
eagerness in her voice, however.  It had struck her, doubtless, that it
of the poker and twisted it outward as a lever. The hasp sprang open
selfish, no doubt, disloyal, wrong, but I could realize nothing save
one.


away in a safe place.  There are no rupees for you this journey."
"This is a very serious matter, Small," said the detective.  "If you
another man is at his ease in a palace with the money that should be
want to hear my story I have no wish to hold it back. What I say to you
"I wasnt destined to do much soldiering, however.  I had just got past
misfortune soon proved to be a blessing in disguise. A man named

whiskey-pegs and smoking cheroots, while the country was in a blaze
where I stood I could see hundreds of the black fiends, with their red
of artillery.  A volunteer corps of clerks and merchants had been
of you gentlemen have ever read or heard anything of that old fort.  It
guarded, of course, in the old quarter as well as in that which was


children be treated as they were in Cawnpore.  Maybe you gentlemen
hesitate.  Either you are heart and soul with us on your oath on the
the naked knife, and by the threefold oath which no Sikh was ever known
treasure which shall be equally divided among the four of us.
though his lands are small.  Much has come to him from his father, and
into the cause of the Sepoys, since they were strong upon his borders.
"In Worcestershire the life of a man seems a great and a sacred thing;
will be enough to make every one of us rich men and great chiefs.  No

"You will challenge him, Sahib, as usual, whispered Abdullah. Give
never seen so tall a man.  The other was a little, fat, round fellow,

death.  I remained at the gate-way with the lantern.
rolled twice over like a shot rabbit.  Ere he could stagger to his feet
interested in the story, but with the same disgust written upon their
was, too, for all that he was so short.  Mahomet Singh was left to
forty-three diamonds of the first water, including one which has been
secret.  We agreed to conceal our loot in a safe place until the
back of the business was broken.  Fresh troops came pouring in, and
thought he had taken refuge in the fort, and applied for admission

given a hut in Hope Town, which is a small place on the slopes of Mount
cards.  The surgery, where I used to make up my drugs, was next to his
been at the Andamans, and they knew each others game to a point, while
"Its all up, Morstan, he was saying, as they passed my hut. I shall
hidden treasure should be handed over.  I know where half a million

"Two nights later he and his friend Captain Morstan came to my hut in
concern of your own, which of course you have the power of disposing of

always act together.
us.
finally to return to his duties.  Captain Morstan was then to apply for
went over to Agra shortly afterwards, and found, as we expected, that
had gone to a lonely place to die.  I took him in hand, though he was
"He was stanch and true, was little Tonga.  No man ever had a more
enough.  I made for the boat, and in an hour we were well out at sea.
night.  A hundred times I have killed him in my sleep.  At last,
knew that he was gone.  I got into his room that same night, though,
the treasure.  At last, however, came what we had waited for so long.
upon the table, to show that the jewels had come back at last to those
"A very remarkable account," said Sherlock Holmes.  "A fitting wind-up

"Well, and there is the end of our little drama," I remarked, after we
preserved that Agra plan from all the other papers of her father.  But
and also of a pretty spry sort of fellow.  I often think of those lines
"For me," said Sherlock Holmes, "there still remains the

which utterly submerged my mind. Let me say to that public, which has
which led up to a verdict of willful murder against some person or
she, her son Ronald, and her daughter Hilda were living together at
also played there in the afternoon. The evidence of those who had played
floor, generally used as his sitting-room. She had lit a fire there, and
A minute examination of the circumstances served only to make the case
revolver bullet, which had mushroomed out, as soft-nosed bullets will,
coloured glasses, whom I strongly suspected of being a plain-clothes
My observations of No. 427 Park Lane did little to clear up the problem

Here’s BRITISH BIRDS, and CATULLUS, and THE HOLY WAR--a bargain, every

I’m overjoyed to see you. Sit down, and tell me how you came alive out
situation when that work is finished.”
“No, Watson, I never was in it. My note to you was absolutely genuine.
But for all his efforts he could not get his balance, and over he went.
They were all most dangerous men. One or other would certainly get me.
have reversed my boots, as I have done on similar occasions, but the
conclusions, you departed for the hotel, and I was left alone. I
“I did not take long to think about it, Watson. Again I saw that grim
that it was true. Several times during the last three years I have taken
friend. I then passed through Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a
the other chair which he has so often adorned.”

subsequent street corner he took the utmost pains to assure that he was
forward down a long hall, until I dimly saw the murky fanlight over the

head, the squareness of the shoulders, the sharpness of the features.


remarkable performer upon the jew’s-harp. I cared nothing for him. But
long street. Many people were moving to and fro, most of them muffled in
“The shadow has moved!” I cried.
forward, his whole attitude rigid with attention. Outside the street
crept down the passage--steps which were meant to be silent, but which
An opera hat was pushed to the back of his head, and an evening dress
it peered along the sights. I heard a little sigh of satisfaction as
“That you, Lestrade?” said Holmes.

lay on the ledge above the Reichenbach Fall.”
“I wonder that my very simple stratagem could deceive so old a SHIKARI,”
street, where my friend, Lestrade and his merry men were awaiting you.



that the illusion from the street was absolutely perfect.
thing fired from an airgun? All right, Mrs. Hudson. I am much obliged

friend of to-night.”

pedigree. The person becomes, as it were, the epitome of the history of
Moriarty gang was broken up, we could not incriminate him. You remember
appealing to a magistrate. They cannot interfere on the strength of what
doorway with unerring accuracy--I took up what seemed to me to be a
“I think that it is not difficult to explain the facts. It came out in
coins. Will it pass?”

that the great malignant brain was there, as the gentlest tremors of
of Holmes, and that it was my friend who had really found the money.
followed immediately by a hollow drumming sound, as if someone were
“Have a cigarette, Mr. McFarlane,” said he, pushing his case across.
“Yes, I am all that, Mr. Holmes; and, in addition, I am the most
“Dear me,” said he, “it was only this moment at breakfast that I was
it leads infallibly to me. I have been followed from London Bridge
the kindness to take the paper and to read the paragraph in question?”
was given that one of the stacks was on fire. The engines were soon upon
is a young London solicitor named John Hector McFarlane, junior partner
charcoal ashes of the fire. The police theory is that a most sensational


“I think there will be no difficulty in clearing it up,” said Lestrade,
Lestrade looked at his watch. “I’ll give you half an hour,” said he.
found that, with some reservations, he had left all his property to me.
Norwood that night, bringing the will with me, and to arrange matters.

which there stood a heavy safe. This he opened and took out a mass of
more until I read of this horrible affair in the morning.”
“I think I should like to have a word with you presently, Mr. Sherlock
page, and one or two at the end. Those are as clear as print,” said


imagined his crime to be a bloodless one, and hoped that if the


“Well, Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you may look for your tramp, and while you
When the detective departed, my friend rose and made his preparations
to so unexpected an heir. It may do something to simplify what followed.
face before Lestrade, but, upon my soul, I believe that for once the
unconsciously considerably strengthening the case of the police for, of
‘That is my own photograph,’ she said. ‘He sent it to me in that state,
“This place, Deep Dene House, is a big modern villa of staring brick,
was to be seen save that some body or bundle had been dragged through
“Only one little gleam of hope did I get--and yet it amounted to
us something if she would--I am convinced of it. But she was as close as
affairs.
murderer, Bert Stevens, who wanted us to get him off in ‘87? Was there
Cornelius might be a broker, but we have found no scrip to correspond
It was from Norwood, and ran as follows:
moral support today.”

once for all that it was John McFarlane who did this crime.”



as to see that nothing was touched.”
dead of the night in order to strengthen the evidence against himself,”
“And yet there are singular points about it which hold out some hopes






“Fire!” we all yelled.
“Capital!” said Holmes, calmly. “Watson, a bucket of water over the
“I have done no harm.”
mystery to me how you did it. You have saved an innocent man’s life,
his foolscap once more--eh, Watson? Well, now, let us see where this rat
“I made up my mind that the fellow was in hiding in the house. When I
Therefore, it had been put on during the night.”
If you examine among those documents which he took with him into
in his wicked, scheming brain, and all his life he has longed for
his old sweetheart, if he could give the impression that he had been

“I have to thank you for a good deal,” said he. “Perhaps I’ll pay my

faculties, this sudden intrusion into my most intimate thoughts was

your small capital in the gold fields.”

very anxious to know. This little conundrum came by the first post, and
time to study it before I came.”

that I don’t make clear. I’ll begin at the time of my marriage last
“She was very straight about it, was Elsie. I can’t say that she did not
But about a month ago, at the end of June, I saw for the first time
“Well, now I come to the queer part of my story. About a week ago--it
threatening my little woman, I would spend my last copper to shield
“A promise is a promise, Mr. Holmes. If Elsie wished to tell me she
“These hieroglyphics have evidently a meaning. If it is a purely
The interview left Sherlock Holmes very thoughtful, and several times in
We had not long to wait, for our Norfolk squire came straight from the
poor girl has wanted to speak, and yet could not quite bring herself
When I got back after my visit to you, the very first thing I saw next

steps behind me, and there was my wife in her dressing-gown. She
moonlight, and her hand tightened upon my shoulder. Something was moving
“Have you that fresh drawing?”

in the shrubbery, and when this fellow comes again to give him such a
Sherlock Holmes preserved his calm professional manner until our visitor
we shall be able to go down to Norfolk tomorrow, and to take our friend
GRAPHIC
that is quite as I expected. This message makes it even more essential
you are the detectives from London?” said he.
“It’s a terrible business,” said the stationmaster. “They are shot, both
every hand enormous square-towered churches bristled up from the flat
“Why, Mr. Holmes, the crime was only committed at three this morning.
“I should be proud to feel that we were acting together, Mr. Holmes,”
was only the one pistol found in the room, two barrels of which had
“Anyone else?”

The two women told their story clearly enough. They had been aroused
in his dressing-gown, over his night-clothes. Nothing had been moved in
and with a writing-table facing an ordinary window, which looked out
wounded the lady?”
“Because I looked for it.”
door of the room had been open. Otherwise the fumes of powder could not
the bullet mark!”
which has clearly, from the splintering of the wood, been fired from
that we have now exhausted all that this room can teach us. If you will


“Very lonely, sir.”
handed a note to the boy, with directions to put it into the hands
When the youth had been dispatched with the note, Sherlock Holmes gave
so long unsatisfied. To you, Inspector, the whole incident may appeal
“Having once recognized, however, that the symbols stood for letters,
the English letters after E is by no means well marked, and any
respectively for N, V, and R.
each symbol which was still unknown. So treated, it worked out in this
Or, filling in the obvious vacancies in the name:
writer was staying.”
than once made use of my knowledge of London crime. I asked him whether
worst had already occurred.”
“Then let us go arrest him.”

Holmes clapped a pistol to his head, and Martin slipped the handcuffs
“You’re crazy!” he cried, fiercely. “It was he that was hurt, not she.
than I loved her. I had a right to her. She was pledged to me years ago.
palm. “See here, mister! he cried, with a gleam of suspicion in his
the knowledge which I happened to possess, which has saved her from the
seven of us in a gang in Chicago, and Elsie’s father was the boss of the
wiser. I tried all I could to coax Elsie away. I knew that she read the
every word of it, and I heard no more about it until that lad came

it was an invitation which he would not refuse, since he could never

it may be imagined that it is no easy task to know which I should select
Her visit was, I remember, extremely unwelcome to Holmes, for he was
was that was troubling her.

“A beautiful neighbourhood, and full of the most interesting
someone had left us a fortune. We went at once to the lawyer whose name

about him? What I wished to say was that Mr. Woodley was perfectly

“And now, Mr. Holmes, I come at last to the special thing which has
of road. My astonishment was increased when the incident occurred again,
about his face that I could clearly see was his dark beard. To-day I was

own grounds on one side of the road. Anything else?”
“Have you had any other admirers?”
that my employer, Mr. Carruthers, takes a great deal of interest in me.
“You will let me know any fresh development, Miss Smith. I am very busy
Carruthers and Woodley, since they appear to be men of such a different
stepping-stones on which we may hope to get across to our solution.”
The heath was covered with golden patches of flowering gorse, gleaming
graceful girl sitting very straight upon her machine, and the man behind
see him standing among the trees. His hands were raised, and he seemed
affairs of his clients were not matters which he could discuss.
again, you see. You really have done remarkably badly. He returns to the
little more until next Saturday, and in the meantime I may make one or
more features of interest and more possibility of development than I had
should have come to very ignominious grief without it.”
moustache, Mr. Woodley by name, who was always there. We had got as far
leaving Mr. Carruthers’s employment. Even the high pay cannot reconcile
wild animal loose about the place. I loathe and fear him more than I
not only dared not address her, but even fled from her approach, he
sandy road inhaling the fresh morning air and rejoicing in the music of
vehicle, but we hastened onward at such a pace that my sedentary life
We had sprung into the dog-cart, and Holmes, after turning the horse,
pistol from his side “Pull up, I say, or, by George, I’ll put a bullet
ecstasy of despair. “They’ve got her, that hell-hound Woodley and the
terrible cut upon his head. He was insensible, but alive. A glance at
of us. It ended suddenly on its highest note with a choke and a gurgle.
prayer-book as we appeared, and slapped the sinister bridegroom upon the
Our guide’s answer was a singular one. He snatched off the dark beard
Woodley’s waistcoat. He spun round with a scream and fell upon his back,
“Good Lord!”


and it is the only time that ever I knew what love was--it fairly drove
face that. Even if she couldn’t love me, it was a great deal to me just

ever you did.”

plunder. For some reason, Woodley was chosen as the husband. Why was

violence. So he went off cursing, like the foul-mouthed blackguard that
it is likely that neither he nor the interesting bridegroom will be
have passed for ever out of our busy lives. I find, however, a short
THE ADVENTURE OF THE PRIORY SCHOOL
We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silent

“When you are quite restored----”
“What! the late Cabinet Minister?”
Castle, Bangor, Wales. Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; Chief Secretary of
Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton, has to do
his secretary, with intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten years old,
establishment. In a fortnight the boy was quite at home with us and was
that anything in the nature of cries or a struggle would have been
“He had been with me for two years, and came with the best references,
between them showed that he needed no exhortation to concentrate all
“But there has been some official investigation?”
“So that three days have been wasted. The affair has been most
“That is certainly very singular. Had the boy a bicycle?”




“Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the
“The Duke, then?”

“The Duke is here,” said he. “The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the study.

possible into his confidence.”
“I agree with Mr. Wilder, Dr. Huxtable, that you would have done wisely
son?”

“No, sir, certainly not.”
“How many letters did your Grace write that day?”
wished to put, but the nobleman’s abrupt manner showed that the
down. That one dint in the short, green grass was the only material
do with our investigation.
what passed along this road during the night in question. At this point,

few moor farmers have small holdings, where they rear sheep and cattle.

purse will certainly get out of them all that they know.”
Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently already
And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment. With high hopes we
We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it,
“The boy’s, then?”
We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as
deal unexplored.”

“A side-slip,” I suggested.
looked ahead, the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the thick
advanced us much in our inquiry.
with a note to Dr. Huxtable.
fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he would do.
his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist. He would not do

the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patched cover has to
he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly man was smoking a

“The matter is very important. I would offer you a sovereign for the use

I was head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me. It was him that
“Well, well,” said Holmes, “we’ll talk about it when we’ve had something

“Yes, it is strange.”
leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been, not to draw my

loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.
that the curve hid us from the landlord’s view.
the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall, I saw a
Wilder’s bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one was
A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middle of
we must really take a risk and try to investigate this a little more
I think that we have gathered all that we can. It’s a long walk to the
found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace of that
“I believe he is in his bed.”
“Well, Mr. Holmes?” said he.
secretary.

should be glad if you would make me out a check for six thousand pounds.


“I have spoken to no one.”

present, and which he loathes and abhors as much as you do. The instant
Mr. James Wilder, and that he is not the murderer.”
“You seem to have powers that are hardly human,” said he. “So Reuben
desperate situation to which James’s folly and jealousy have reduced
that for her dear sake there was no end to my long-suffering. All her
evening James bicycled over--I am telling you what he has himself
what was James’s motive in doing such a deed. I answer that there was
man Heidegger’s dead body. James was seized with horror at the news. It
impossible to inform the police where he was without telling them also


to save him from it. What he will divulge I cannot tell, but I have
that you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily
furnished as a museum. He led the way to a glass case in a corner, and
“And the first?”
were even to hint at the identity of some of the illustrious clients who
his arrest of Wilson, the notorious canary-trainer, which removed a
confidence. The first positive sign which he gave me of the direction
prepared to bet that you will not guess the form that my exercise has


“Well, well, it just happens that I have already read all the available
“No doubt. I only mention it because, if I had been handling the case,
has lived for six years, and there he died just a week ago to-day.
Peter Carey, and I have heard that he bore the same character when he
which were covered by curtains and never opened. One of these windows
window. Besides, this refers to the Monday, and the crime was done upon
over the case.
instant that he had uttered that last yell of agony.
contained no trace which could have aided us. I understand, however,
Carey was fully dressed, suggested that he had an appointment with the
“There was this tobacco-pouch upon the table.”
“C.P.R.,” and then came several sheets of numbers. Another heading was
“What a fool I have been!” he cried. “Of course, it is as you say. Then
which did not appear at the inquest, modifies any views which I may have
“Yes, sir, it is a blood-stain. I told you that I picked the book off
property of the dead man?”


Stanley Hopkins led us first to the house, where he introduced us to a
lock, when he paused with a look of attention and surprise upon his
“Some curious person from the village, perhaps,” I suggested.

shelf than elsewhere. It may have been a book lying on its side. It may

the foliage which roofed us in.
moustache, which intensified the deadly pallor of his face. He could not
shivering and cowering in the grasp of the detective. He sank down upon

“Well, I will tell you,” he said. “Why should I not? And yet I hate to
wall with one of his own harpoons. We all listened intently to the young
securities that he had taken with him, were at the bottom of the sea. We
evidence how these securities came on the market it would be a proof
“Is that all?” asked Hopkins.
damning notebook, with the initials of our prisoner on the first leaf
reserved for you at the Brambletye Hotel, so we can all walk down to the

Holmes.’ There, Watson, this infernal case has haunted me for ten days.

order to do the right thing by his father’s creditors. After his flight
on the blind two nights before? No, no, Hopkins, it is another and more
reach it.” He rose and laid a written paper upon a side-table. “Now we
“James Lancaster.”
“Your name?” asked Holmes.

side-table. If you sign it the whole matter will be settled.”
his rescue. Only when I pressed the cold muzzle of the revolver to his
see what you have done, but I don’t know how you did it or what it

week’s southerly gale, when we picked up a little craft that had been
was nobody’s business to inquire. Shortly after Peter Carey gave up the
and my sleep. I stood there, with his blood splashing round me, and I
and nothing but papers that I would not dare to sell. I had lost my hold
“Simply by having the good fortune to get the right clue from the
“My dear sir, the problem had become a very simple one. If it were
must be returned to him, but, of course, the securities which Peter
reach of human law, and with due suppression the story may be told


the result. Everything which is in the market goes to Milverton, and
woman, for example, to get him a few months’ imprisonment if her own
commissioned to meet him, and--to make the best terms I can.”
little hand extended, murmuring his regret for having missed us at his


“They are sprightly--very sprightly,” Milverton answered. “The lady

make some little effort upon her behalf. They may hesitate as to an
engagement between the Honourable Miss Miles and Colonel Dorking? Only
example of the Lady Eva, I should find all of them much more open to
that I am armed to the teeth, and I am perfectly prepared to use my
into his bedroom. A little later a rakish young workman, with a goatee
“You would not call me a marrying man, Watson?”

“You like this weather?”
“My dear fellow, I have given it every consideration. I am never
upon this, when a lady is in most desperate need of his help?”
“Well, I don’t like it, but I suppose it must be,” said I. “When do we


Holmes and I put on our dress-clothes, so that we might appear to be two
as to give me a clear run. This is the house, this big one in its own
The place was locked, but Holmes removed a circle of glass and turned
A fire was burning in this new room, and again the air was heavy with
to the door of the bedroom, and stood with slanting head listening
curtains if it is not. Do you understand?”
his overcoat on a chair--Holmes laid out two drills, a jemmy, and

of Holmes’s shoulder against mine, I knew that he was sharing my


more. He had resumed his seat, the cigar still projecting at an insolent
“You say that you have five letters which compromise the Countess
assure you I wouldn’t hurt a fly of my own accord, but every man has his
arrested. But I will make allowance for your natural anger. Leave the
cried, and lay still. The woman looked at him intently, and ground her
household. With perfect coolness Holmes slipped across to the safe,
know the grounds perfectly, and he threaded his way swiftly among
sitting-room.
would step down to Appledore Towers, and give us the benefit of your
neck, moustache, a mask over his eyes.”

caught my breath as I read the time-honoured title of the great nobleman
details of any case upon which the detective was engaged, and was able


shop of Morse Hudson, who has a place for the sale of pictures and

dashed savagely against the garden wall, under which its splintered

three were the only ones which had been in his shop for years. So,
amount of IDEE FIXE would enable your interesting monomaniac to find out
therefore, to smile at your three broken busts, Lestrade, and I shall

the London message-boy. There’s a deed of violence indicated in that
turn.”
string of different people, and I can make no use of it myself. However,
minutes later, there came a most horrible yell--the most dreadful sound,
knees drawn up, and his mouth horribly open. I shall see him in my
it is.”
the window. “The fellow had either very long legs or was a most active
As we left the room, we heard his pen travelling shrilly over the
“We have a long way to go yet,” said he. “And yet--and yet--well, we


“No doubt; and yet it is not quite the way in which I should approach

to-night, if my chain of reasoning should prove to be correct. Until
fate. Let us make for Mr. Morse Hudson, of the Kennington Road, and see
one are three--two of Dr. Barnicot’s, and one smashed in broad daylight

should be different from any of the other casts. He could suggest no
always been a respectable establishment, and the only time that we have
more important it seems to grow. When you referred in your ledger to the
“Kensington Outrage. Murder by a Madman,” and the contents of the paper

Lodge, Laburnum Vale, Chiswick, and one to Mr. Sandeford, of Lower Grove
him pacing up and down in a fever of impatience. His look of importance

photograph we found in his pocket is the man himself, so that he may not
“And the next stage?”
you will come with me to Chiswick to-night, Lestrade, I’ll promise to go
windings of this complex case, and, though I could not yet perceive the
lamp we read “Laburnum Villa” upon the gate-post of one of them. The
gate swung open, and a lithe, dark figure, as swift and active as an
under his arm. He looked stealthily all round him. The silence of the
broken into similar fragments. Carefully Holmes held each separate shard
within a few minutes our cab had been summoned and we were all four upon
“Besides, there are one or two details which are not finished off, and
jail--once for a petty theft, and once, as we had already heard, for

“Certainly.”
before I take ten pounds from you.
right that you ever had in the bust to me. I am a methodical man, you
“Gentlemen,” he cried, “let me introduce you to the famous black pearl
inductive reasoning, to trace it from the Prince of Colonna’s bedroom at
made. Now you clearly see the sequence of events, though you see them,
was an admirable hiding-place. No one could possibly find it. But Beppo

There remained two busts, and it was obvious that he would go for the
the oldest inspector to the youngest constable, who wouldn’t be glad to
THE ADVENTURE OF THE THREE STUDENTS

what to do.”
chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He
to read it over carefully, as the text must be absolutely correct. At
few minutes of my leaving it. His forgetfulness about the key would
“Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly know that?”
him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair, while I made a
long--not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not only this, but on
can,” said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. “The case is not
“But might be recognized as proofs?”


“He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except the

tossed it down and seized the next. He was in the midst of that when
additional aid.”
Faber is the most common maker’s name. Is it not clear that there is

suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs. Holmes turned away, and
he had no warning until you were at the very door. What could he do?


the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. He is
“Then it is he whom you suspect?”

“It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames’ tea time.”
“Has the outer door a spring lock?”
“Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that I
“You stayed here when your master left?”


of the Indian--a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, who eyed us askance,

must be faced.”
invisible.


careless servant, and the three enterprising students.”


despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?”

“Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down
“There was no man, sir.”
I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go up to the room of
The unfortunate young man staggered back, and cast a look full of horror
“Come, come,” said Holmes, kindly, “it is human to err, and at least
did he know?
jumper. Then the whole thing came to me in an instant, and I only needed
“Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that
The earth round the spike had been left on the table, and a second
early this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was before I
were left in the room, and must have locked the door when you went out.
Mr. Soames he went for you. Then out came my poor young master, whom I

the Boulevard assassin--an exploit which won for Holmes an autograph
miles of man’s handiwork on every side of us, to feel the iron grip of
hoofs, and the long grind of a wheel as it rasped against the curb. The

“It is indeed, Mr. Holmes. I’ve had a bustling afternoon, I promise you.
see, it is just as tangled a business as ever I handled, and yet at
round the house with a stick or being pushed about the grounds by the
decent, quiet, hard-working fellow, with no weak spot in him at all.
pensioner--an old Crimean man of excellent character. He does not live
passage and descend to the study immediately below her. She did not
an ivory handle and a stiff blade. It was part of the fittings of the
that the professor was still in his night-clothes, and indeed it was
smile. “Well, let us hear about it. What sort of a job did you make of
studied it over his shoulder.
criminal. No footmarks were to be found on the path. There could be no
“A hundred yards or so.”

of any kind. This brought me into the study itself. It is a scantily
“Unless he fell upon the knife,” said Holmes.
to read through them, went to the window and stared up the street with
optician at least twice during the last few months. As her glasses are
showing that the lady’s nose was very broad at the base. This sort of


Place between eight and nine.”
and so we were all ready for business when we at last arrived at Yoxley


usually kept open, I suppose? Then this visitor had nothing to do but
bureau. Halloa! what is that scratch upon the face of it? Just hold a
A sad-faced, elderly woman came into the room.
“Is it a simple key?”
“No sir, it is impossible. Before I got down the stair, I’d have seen

gaunt, aquiline face which was turned towards us, with piercing dark

a man of action--you are a man of affairs. It is part of the everyday
why, you are even a quicker smoker than I am myself.”
stupidity of that class. I fancy that the poor fellow murmured some
love-gages may take strange shapes. By all means take another cigarette.



“Well, I don’t know about that, sir.”
let it take his appetite away.”
Holmes was weaving it into the general scheme which he had formed in his
on our knees retrieving stray cigarettes from impossible places. When we
“This instant.”
I do not find that slight discolouration which the scratch made upon the
her glasses in the scuffle, and as she was extremely short-sighted she
during the day.”

and what with the change from dark to light, she stood as one dazed,
I held in my hand, for in my despair I snatched anything from the table
“God bless you!”
“We were reformers--revolutionists--Nihilists, you understand. He and I
“I have not yet told you the height of his villainy,” said she. “Among
“You were always a noble woman, Anna,” said the old man, puffing at his
you so hurriedly. He found that papers were kept in the cupboard, and he
him.”
bosom of her dress a small packet. “These are my last words,” said she;
seized these, I am not sure that we could ever have reached our
a trap-door. There might well be a recess behind the books. As you are
retreat. Well, Hopkins, here we are at Charing Cross, and I congratulate
thus:
such periods of inaction, for I knew by experience that my companion’s
the card of Mr. Cyril Overton, Trinity College, Cambridge, announced

Godfrey Staunton.”
“Why, Mr. Holmes, I thought you knew things,” said he. “I suppose,
healthier one. My ramifications stretch out into many sections of
To-morrow we play Oxford. Yesterday we all came up, and we settled at
of the Strand. This morning Godfrey’s room was empty, his bed had never
I have had an answer. No one has seen him.”


rough-looking fellow at so late an hour, and the agitation that was
witness at his ease, and very soon, in the privacy of Godfrey Staunton’s
“Yes, sir, I go off duty at eleven.”

“Did you take it?”

following hieroglyphic:
“So that is the tail end of the telegram which Godfrey Staunton
crossed my mind. But I daresay it may have come to your notice that,
“Have you ever known him ill?”
appearance, his voice had a sharp crackle, and his manner a quick



neckcloth.
consult with the other members of his team over the misfortune which had
this was so?”

“And what have you gained?”

very obvious one is that this young man really is the heir of a great
a cab at the station and ordered the man to drive to the house of Dr.
held my friend’s card in his hand, and he looked up with no very pleased
waste the time of men who are more busy than yourself. At the present
“You know him, do you not?”
“I have no sympathy with these childish games. The young man’s fate
“Absolutely.”

undoubtedly associated with his disappearance--and yet you have not had
he. “I have not seen a man who, if he turns his talents that way, was
him to rise and glance out of the window. A brougham and pair of grays,

to our inn. Into this I rushed, engaged a bicycle, and was able to get
me. Of course, I had at the outset no particular reason to connect
know any fresh London developments at this address, and in the meantime


back at night weary and unsuccessful.
“I don’t understand it.”
more than neutralized the efforts of a heavy and hard-working pack.’”
key which will unlock our mystery. On this syringe I base all my hopes.
he opened the door of a loose-box and led out a squat, lop-eared,

“No wonder that my inquiries among those villagers led to nothing. The

He opened the door, and we stepped into the hall. The droning sound
“Yes, yes, I am--but you are too late. She is dead.”
 said my friend, with dignity. “If you could step downstairs with us,
no breach of the law in this matter, you can absolutely depend upon my
well, and I loved him for his many excellent qualities. I did all I
the girl’s father, and he very injudiciously communicated it to Godfrey.
THE ADVENTURE OF THE ABBEY GRANGE
the opalescent London reek. Holmes nestled in silence into his heavy
to leave Sir Eustace there. Yours faithfully, STANLEY HOPKINS.

up to his reputation, and that we shall have an interesting morning. The
widespread house, pillared in front after the fashion of Palladio. The
“Exactly; the father and two sons. It’s their work. I have not a doubt
together.”


and high-spirited woman to be tied to him for day and night? It is a
did.
bedroom candle lit in my hand, and, by its light, behind the first man I
horrible blow as he passed. He fell with a groan and never moved again.

of Abbey Grange hasn’t learned new ways. You’ve questioned her long
rogues that he should soil his hands with them? An abstruse and learned
which was secured at each side to the crosspiece below. In releasing the
witness to the savage ferocity of the blow which had struck him down.
every seaport already, and a reward will be offered before evening. What
“He was a good-hearted man when he was sober, but a perfect fiend when
when the burglar had dragged it down.
early hour, and that no one could possibly hear a bell ring in the

“Exactly. These three glasses upon the sideboard have been untouched, I
deep-set eyes. He raised the cork and examined it minutely.
you will observe that the screw was driven in three times before the
see nothing remarkable? Well, well, let it pass. Perhaps, when a man has
gone back once more to the great dining-room of the Abbey Grange, in
cut-and-dried story to warp my mind, should I not then have found
without embarking on another perilous undertaking. Again, it is unusual
must either kill her or else secure her in such a way that she could
“Why not? There was wine in each glass.”

Sherlock Holmes, finding that Stanley Hopkins had gone off to report to
the broken end of the rope, but it was not this so much as the bracket
Watson, we have come upon the handiwork of a very remarkable individual.
would see that it is cut clean off without any mark of fraying whatever.
husband. I’ll wager that the black dress shows a corresponding mark to
might have thrown a dozen if he had but left my bonny bird alone. He was
much of her, for she has gone through all that flesh and blood will

mistress has told a lie?”

we will draw the larger cover first.”
about his record and character.
discovery of the criminal than ever he had done by his crime. I have


discovering the silver.”

mind. You might possibly find that there was something in it. You won’t

tall young man, golden-moustached, blue-eyed, with a skin which had been

The sailor thought for a little. Then he struck his leg with his great
“I must go back a bit. You seem to know everything, so I expect that you
that. I just rejoiced that good luck had come her way, and that she had
much as I did. From her I learned the ways of the house. Mary used to
sorry? Not I! It was his life or mine, but far more than that, it was
carry out the idea of the robbery, and there I left them, with orders
of life, since she was trying hard to shield him, and so showing that
“And then it will all come out?”
great responsibility that I take upon myself, but I have given Hopkins

his successes were of some practical value to him, but since he
It was, then, in a year, and even in a decade, that shall be nameless,

its publication might very easily--I might almost say probably--lead to
my bedroom in a locked despatch-box. It was there last night. Of that
eleven before we went to our room.”
“Surely your wife knew?”

to think that within a few hours I should myself have lost it!” His

“That is a State secret of the utmost importance, and I fear that I
sir,” he began, but mastered his anger and resumed his seat. For a
“You may safely trust us.”
“Exactly. It was he. And it is this letter--this letter which may well
“If this is so, whose interest is it that the letter should come out?
“Yes, sir.”
Holmes shook his head mournfully.
eleven-thirty, probably near the earlier hour, since whoever took it
“They are both old and tried servants.”
“I fancy not. These agents work independently, and their relations with
silence and sat for some time lost in the deepest thought. I had opened

had astonished him. He stared in amazement, and then snatched the
best amateur tenors in the country. Mr. Lucas is an unmarried man,
with which the crime had been committed was a curved Indian dagger,
very hours when we know that that drama was being enacted. The odds are
European Secretary’s household--a small thing, and yet where events are
charm and the beautiful colouring of that exquisite head. And yet as
“Your ladyship places me in a very delicate position. I beg that you
understand it. You are the only other person, save only these
withheld? It is not fair to ask it. It is him whom you must ask.”

you will say nothing of my visit.”
that she comes of a caste who do not lightly show emotion.”
extraordinary conduct may depend upon a hairpin or a curling tongs.
devoured sandwiches at irregular hours, and hardly answered the casual
many acquaintances among them, but few friends, and no one whom he
had been presents from the deceased, and the housekeeper was able to
A discovery has just been made by the Parisian police [said the DAILY
some reason lived a double life in London and Paris. Mme. Fournaye,

from the government, and it is certain that nowhere in Europe is there
interest. Put on your hat, Watson, and we will stroll down together to
and the hangings, all pointed to a taste which was luxurious to the
had seen it.”
day and night. This morning, as the man was buried and the investigation
“Well, you will be surprised to hear that there is no stain on the white
“Now, I’ll show you the explanation. There IS a second stain, but it
I could see from Holmes’s rigid face that he was vibrating with inward

and the drugget had only just been drawn straight when Lestrade’s voice

she fell on it and it lies on a polished floor with nothing to keep it
“Yes, sir, only once.”

step and held up something in his hand. The constable stared intently.

should think that I was intruding into his affairs. And yet you


She stared at him with an ashen face and gulped twice before she could
I have returned the lost letter to your husband. Take my advice and be


“What a stroke of luck! Quick, madam, bring it here!” A moment later she

is years since I wrote it. I had thought that the whole matter was
did it, Mr. Holmes! I took an impression of his key. This man, Lucas,
“What happened after that is like some fearful dream. I have a vision of
grasped it my whole mind was turned to the one thought of getting back

point where it might be, and I am sure that there is no danger to be



“Thank you! Thank you! What a weight from my heart. But this is
Holmes turned away smiling from the keen scrutiny of those wonderful

"Suppose," he cried with feeble violence, "that all the debts in the
She sat with that proud, delicate profile of hers outlined against the
and hard; but such a thought was treason.  That delicately bronzed
I drew my chair a little nearer.  "Now, how did you know that I was
She had sprung from her chair, as she saw signs that I proposed to
"But why cant you love me, Gladys?  Is it my appearance, or what?"

"Tell me about him.  What does he look like?"
should love, but always the glories he had won; for they would be

"But you shouldnt do it merely to please me.  You should do it because
"I had to.  If you want to write good copy, you must be where the
do something in the world yet!"
the Camberwell tram with my heart glowing within me, and with the eager
unit, with the settled determination that very night, if possible, to
the real boss; but he lived in the rarefied atmosphere of some Olympian
have the true descreeptive touch.  What did you want to see me about?"

it would be fine.  How does it appeal to you?"
Enmore Park?"
wrong fashion.  You may have better luck, or more tact in handling him.
Crayston Medal for Zoological Research.  Foreign Member of--well,
and not a red face, which was fronting me.  "I am not very clear yet
big enough to look after yourself.  Anyway, you are all safe.
a fanatic in science.  Was there not an exposed margin there upon which
South America."
The President of the Zoological Institute presents his compliments to
intercourse----  It quite broke the old man up."
business."

pathetically, to my help-mate.
"Well, yes; I propose to write to him.  If I could frame the letter

through the series of generations. Have you no desire, in view of
"Well if your conscience can stand it----"
students, so far as they dare take a liberty with him.  Perhaps it

really needs amplification I shall consent to see you at the hour
some new stuff, cuticura or something, which is better than arnica."
"An appointment."

"Dear me!  That is his most dangerous subject.  You wont believe a
He sat in a rotating chair behind a broad table, which was covered with
for two enormous hands covered with long black hair.  This and a
you?  My general conclusions you are good enough to approve, as I
possible need of your sympathy.  Put me alone, sir, and with my back to
it seemed to me that you were a little severe upon Weissmann in this
"Naturally," said I.

sir--scientific gibberish!  Did you think you could match cunning with
be as abusive as you like.  But there is a limit.  You shall not
mans menaces were putting me in the right.
mouth was full of  his beard, our arms were locked, our bodies
situation.  A policeman was beside us, his notebook in his hand.

there was something humorous at the back of his eyes.
Hardly was it shut when Mrs. Challenger darted out from the
"I assure you, madam, that it is all right."

it.  A more absurd object than she presented cocked up there with her
you come."


officious policeman, in which I seemed to discern some glimmering of
half-covered by supercilious lids.  Now he suddenly turned himself


"Yes, sir."
"You are aware--or probably, in this half-educated age, you are not
from their signs that someone had urgent need of my medical services,
when the final credit of this business comes to be apportioned.
was as dilapidated then as you see it now.  Indeed, I can assure you
sketches of Indians and their ways.  Then came a picture of a cheerful

isolated pyramidal rock, crowned by a great tree, which appeared to be
seen.  It was the wild dream of an opium smoker, a vision of delirium.
"Trade gin, I should think."
America, but it appears to be a European in a sun-hat."
about fifty or sixty feet.  Dont you see that the man is put in for a
single sketch by a wandering American artist who may have done it under
this reconstructed animal of a dead world there was certainly a very
of dried cartilage at one end of it.
"Then I must confess that I dont know what it is."
of Board schools----"
in you somewhere, so we will patiently grope round for it.  We will now
that way.  It was my business to find out what it was."



the only absolute proof of my experiences which I was able to bring


warmly, for I felt that the Professor was an ill-used man.  He leaned
"It was the wet season, Mr. Malone, and my stores were exhausted.  I

volcanic upheaval.  These cliffs, I may remark, are basaltic, and
"So in my simplicity, I had imagined," said the Professor, bitterly.
I fancy that any man of honor would feel the same.  To-night, however,
"And I may come?" I asked eagerly.


you."
redivivus--Cagliostro--all the imposters and bullies in history.  Ill
"Then for Heavens sake, man, write it up!"
My day was a busy one, and I had an early dinner at the Savage Club


of people have accounts to settle with him.  I should say he is about
even boyish spirit was abroad in the gallery and the back portions of
all parts of the hall as to the exact state of his poor toe, which
cage when the step of the bucket-bearing keeper is heard in the
the slight trouble to learn how to make it heard is one of the strange

laboratories out of inorganic materials.  The gulf between the dead and
strange to think that the climax of all the age-long process of Nature
tendency of the sea creatures to take refuge upon the mud-flats, the
voice, repeated slowly the words:  "Which were extinct before the
took amid the wilds of the past seemed invariably to lead him to some

continued his observations.  Now and then, as he made an assertion, he
raised and his enormous head nodding sympathetically, as if he were
One smallest new fact obtained in the laboratory, one brick built into
because he has never himself seen a so-called prehistoric animal,
students.)  "Did you venture to call me a liar?"  ("No, sir, no!"
persecute the prophets!  Galileo!  Darwin, and I----" (Prolonged


Mr. Summerlee declared, with an acid smile, that he fully appreciated
hands such material as will enable you to find your way.  It is only
front of me, was also upon his feet.  He glared back at me with hard
"Lord John Roxtons reputation as a sportsman and a traveler is, of
wielding a heavy umbrella, which rose and fell in the midst of them.

wealthy man of taste and the careless untidiness of the bachelor.  Rich
the Lado Enclave drooping its supercilious lip above them all.
thin at the top, the crisp, virile moustaches, the small, aggressive
"Well," said he, at last, "weve gone and done it, young fellah my

best gentleman jock in the north country.  I could hold him on the flat
and at the worst he can only wing one of us, and the other should have
of Lord Roxtons about the danger only made me irritable.
have a pal with me I want a man I can bank on.  So I sized you down,
it--what?  Very good, Ill fix it with him.  What about your outfit?"


backwater of the Putomayo River.  Now, heres something that would do

of that country, young fellah, the more you would understand that
every mile of it.  Im like an old golf-ball--Ive had all the white
him seated amid his pink radiance, oiling the lock of his favorite
guide us to the unknown land.  In response to a telephone inquiry, we
hands of the editor I leave this account of the events which have led
between his hunting-cap and his muffler.  As for myself, I am glad to
ineffectual people.  My directions for your instruction and guidance
Professor Summerlee.  If you are still capable of self-improvement, of

given to us by Professor Challenger.  Before I reach the surprising
hardships which we have had to encounter.  I had regarded his presence
the many specimens he has acquired.  Among his minor peculiarities are
and sinks readily into his own thoughts, but he is always quick to
These were that Lord John had found himself some years before in that
and breaking down the system which he represented.
his discourses, the peculiar mixture of accurate knowledge and of racy
upon Professor Summerlees face, and he would sit, shaking his sardonic
swarthy fellows, bearded and fierce, as active and wiry as panthers.
At last, after a weary week, the day had come and the hour.  I ask you
"Instructions to Lord John Roxton and party.  To be opened at Manaos

"Time it is," said Lord John.  "You can blow the whistle." He took up
bail for it that nothing has ever been written upon this paper."
intended that you should open it, for it had been my fixed intention to

as there was another ship upon the Atlantic."
Lord John Roxton has chartered a large steam launch, the Esmeralda,
The current of the river is a slight one, the drop being not greater
explained, which would make its further use impossible.  He added

transmitting down the river by canoe, and it may be our last word to

news, for the first serious personal trouble (I pass over the incessant
Challenger is provocative in the last degree, but Summerlee has an acid
The very next day we did actually make our start upon this remarkable
usually see the bottom.  The affluents of the Amazon are, half of them,
shot downwards to trace a thin dazzling line of light amidst the
of forest, life, which abhors darkness, struggles ever upwards to the
drone of insects, like the beat of a distant surf, filled the ear,
"What is it, then?" I asked.


if they were seated together in the smoking-room of the Royal Societys
"I should have thought that even a limited knowledge of comparative
journey.  I confess that the sight of it consoled me, for it was really

shallow stream, running clear and transparent over a sandy bottom.  It
thousand ripples across its shining surface.  It was a fitting avenue
For three days we made our way up this tunnel of hazy green sunshine.
river.  In the morning Lord John and I made our way for a couple of
(it was only the carrying of an aneroid barometer), the matter suddenly

fortune we discovered about this time that both our savants had the

stones, which must have marked a camping-place.
which had grown smaller until they were mere shrubs.  Their place was
Just as night fell we cleared the belt of bamboos, and at once formed
the party, stopped suddenly and pointed excitedly to the right.  As he

unknown, encountering the outlying pickets of this lost world of which
like a prize peacock, and Summerlee is silent, but still sceptical.
A dreadful thing has happened to us.  Who could have foreseen it?  I
us.  I have as companions three remarkable men, men of great
characteristic of basaltic upheavals.  Something of the sort is to be
"It was on that," said Professor Challenger, pointing to this tree,
I mean a stork--only it is the kind of stork which has no feathers, a
Beneath him you might have seen the three of us--myself, sunburnt,
to the summit; but so long as the main cliff overhangs, it is vain to

an ascent.  How otherwise could he have seen the monster which he

not appear to justify such a liberty."

We did indeed, but they were of a terrible and most unexpected nature.
chain which held a stylographic pen, lay among the bones.  There was
Maple White.  At Para they knew nothing.  Fortunately, I had a definite
else could he come by his broken bones, and how could he have been

his guidance and follow on to the westward."
gorge.
point, and this the means by which Maple White and his ill-fated
beneath us.  Suddenly an exclamation broke from Lord Roxton.
Too much cast down to speak, we stumbled down the dark tunnel and made
at us, so the incident surely pointed to humanity--and malevolent
considerably in height, had already begun to trend from west to north,
these inhospitable rocks.  There was a red begonia just the same color
time.  I have no doubt that you feel the same way yourself, and that
for a little distance across the plain.  Well, suddenly out of the
I beg that you will forget what is past."
worse, the place seemed to be a favorite breeding-place of the Jaracaca



minute than our investigation, and it was absolutely certain that there
the deepest thought, and entirely oblivious to the good-night which I
you may congratulate me and we may congratulate each other.  The
"We can never get across," I gasped.
which made my hair bristle upon my head.  The first half was perfectly
away until it ended in dim blue mists upon the farthest sky-line.  In
stood, and the green bank of bushes, with occasional trees, was so near
"Exactly," said Summerlee.  "A fellow-countryman in a far land."

trunk, taking turn and turn with Lord John.  In a little over an hour
"My dear chap," said he, "I really cannot allow it."
The remonstrance was too reasonable to be disregarded.  Challenger
Challenger sat down upon the cut stump and groaned his impatience; but
certainly take it upon myself to act as pioneer upon this occasion."
frame.  He insisted upon having two rifles slung upon his back, so that
The bridge was gone!

there, and none will know where you lie or come to cover them.  As you
then the distant thud of the falling body.  Roxton came back to us with
Now that we had the clue to his action, each of us could cast back and
direction.  The white figure lay motionless in the middle of the great
but of an invincible serenity.  For the moment we could only sit among

than a clothes-line, but it was of great strength, and though we could
We supped and camped at the very edge of the cliff, quenching our
P.S.--The more I think the more desperate does our position seem.  I
to us.  All the paper that I possess consists of five old note-books
villainous Gomez we began a new stage in our experiences.  The first
very small inconvenience of being bitten, my young friend, cannot, I am
unappreciative a fashion.  No doubt, with due diligence, we can secure
But first of all it was necessary to make our arrangements with the
there we sat in cleanly comfort while we made our first plans for the
clearing, and as a first precaution, we cut down with our hatchet and

"Well, it couldnt be helped.  However, the wind was strong and blew
The peaceful penetration of Maple White Land was the pressing subject
several thorny bushes, and left our camp with the stores entirely
wind.  Suddenly Lord John, who was walking first, halted with uplifted
fresh one.  The creature has not passed ten minutes.  Look how the

elephants, while the two large ones were far beyond all creatures I
strength of the parents seemed to be limitless, for one of them, having
finger on the trigger of his elephant-gun, his eager hunters soul
"My dear Summerlee, I will tell you with great confidence exactly what

Lord John.  "Lord, how some of that Somaliland-Uganda crowd would turn

rocks--the whole plateau was strewn with boulders.  We were walking
the bottom, some hundreds of yards from where we lay, were pools of
gigantic old women, wrapped in hideous web-colored shawls, and with
brought destruction upon us all.  In an instant the nearest male gave a
"Make for the wood and keep together," cried Lord John, clubbing his
gurgling at us with a wide-opened beak and blood-shot, goggled eyes,
more.
wings, so we have had a remarkable exhibition of their various methods
have in their hideous jaws?"
matchwood, and one of the brass shells lay shredded into pieces beside
state.  How difficult it was to realize that the violet line upon the
beasts were?"



Lord John had worked so hard in making our retreat impregnable.  We
intermittent, a low, deep-chested laugh, a growling, throaty gurgle of
drama which occurred among the reeds upon the border of some Jurassic
"Hush!" he cried.  "Surely I hear something?"
menace.  It was no higher than a horse, but the dim outline suggested
last.  Perhaps I can make something of the fellow.  Ill chance it,

reserve," said Challenger, with massive condescension.  "I am not
afford to take chances in a country like this.  Two-hour spells in the
more ferocious, than itself.
case.  Among them are to be found all the most terrible types of animal
ones two days before.  Challenger said nothing, but looked pompous and
precious information to a class of a thousand.
would have exhausted their food supply and have been compelled to
and the two savants ascended together into some rarefied scientific
walked ankle-deep on that wonderful yielding carpet, the scent was
We saw many small animals, such as porcupines, a scaly ant-eater, and a
departure by which we were enabled to gain a more complete knowledge of
suggest leaving it before we have acquired more than the most
"For example?" asked Summerlee, with a sneer; but Lord John hastened to
interests of his deplorable profession are immaterial to us; but, as he
gained.  Professor Challenger has devised means for getting us on to
however, until we have made at least a superficial examination of this
light upon the enormous gnarled trunk of the gingko tree which cast its
appearance.  I applaud his resolution."
convenient branches beyond, so that I clambered onwards with such speed
face--or at least it was far more human than any monkeys that I have
"Did you see it?" I cried, with my arms round the branch and all my
from the wind upon my face, that I had topped all the trees of the
the evening light, with a thick fringe of reeds at its edges, and with
of these red cliffs, some distance above the ground, I could see a
"He has been there all the time," said I.
"Tell me, now," he added, with the air of a bishop addressing a
"In South America there are, if my memory serves me--you will check the
quoting the words), "we have got our chart, our one and only immediate
And so the matter was allowed to rest.
need no such monument."
Summerlee.
I have said--or perhaps I have not said, for my memory plays me sad
his rifle across his knees and his pointed, goat-like beard wagging
correspondentship in the next great war might be within my reach.  I
given all I possessed at that moment to have been honorably free of the
from the shadows--this nameless and horrible monster.  I stopped, and,


The night had been exceedingly still, but as I advanced I became
vegetation which draped them, but this asphalt pool in the jungle was
At last (my watch showed that it was one in the morning) I saw the
port-holes of a liner in the darkness.  For a moment I thought it was
word to my comrades as to the appearance and character of the race who
over the water.  Then it dived, and I saw it no more.
For a moment I wondered where I could have seen that ungainly shape,
had kept the little brook upon my left, and it opened into the central
It was something between a snore and a growl, low, deep, and
quiet as in a dream landscape.  Silver clearings and the black patches
spite of its bulk, were exceedingly alert.  For a moment, as I saw its
brow.  What could I do?  My useless fowling-piece was in my hand.  What
him off.  The path lay still behind me.  And then suddenly, with a
grip upon my back.  And then suddenly there came a crash--I was falling
began to walk slowly round, therefore, feeling in every direction to
place into which I had fallen.  There could be no question as to its

connecting cause and effect.  Surely it was more likely that a
And suddenly there came something to remind me of my absent companions.
iguanodons.  Now I was in the last belt of trees which separated me
I might find myself abandoned all alone in that dreadful place, with no
it had been all over in an instant.  The rifles still lay upon the
the night could have carried away a victim as easily as a cat would a
instant my heart leaped for joy, as I thought that one of my comrades
make fast to this stump, and so you have bridge."
come back to us.  Ready now to take letter, bring rope,--anything."
the Indian, and he was promised twice as much if he returned with the
               "A Sight which I shall Never Forget"
associated with the result of our labors.
a rifle, I gave a cry of joy as in the cold gray light I saw Lord John
think.  Get a move on, or we are done!"


and gloated and gloated.  Challenger is no chicken, but even he was
my word they might have been kinsmen.  I couldnt have believed it if I
hides are like leather.  But Challenger was all right.  Four of them
"Very far away."
bass of his, Ring out, wild bells, cause music of any kind seemed to
brought them in as prisoners.  You never heard such a jabberin and
gathered you in.  Of course, as you said, they have been watchin us
butter.  No wonder we found that poor Yankees skeleton with the canes
Java, the other said it was pithecanthropus.  Madness, I call

jaunty manner would increase, his speech become more racy, his cold
formed by the trunks and branches.  Along this a party of the ape-men
We filled in the time by opening one of our food tins and making sure
than further inland.  So thats our line of advance.  Go slowly, keep
minute he was back again, his face quivering with eagerness.
while it is still fresh in my memory, and one at least, the man who lay
crowd of some hundred of these shaggy, red-haired creatures, many of
Professor Challenger.  The remains of his coat still hung in strips
parody of the Professor.
fell back from the edge, formed themselves again into line, and waited

stricken comrades.  The prisoners were left for the moment standing
that unerring rifle.  When we had at last reached the camp, we looked
"By George!" cried our peer, pulling at his moustache in great



"We must move, and move quick!" said Lord John.  "You help Summerlee,

You follow my meaning?"

We all awoke exhausted after the terrific emotions and scanty food of
had made.


own reading of the situation for what it is worth--" he inflated his
reflected credit upon any living race.  As to the Indians I cannot
up a fight as he wasnt in the same weight or class.  For my own part I
the scanty breakfast.  It may seem to you rash that even for so short a
I gave a cry to warn my friends that something was amiss, and running
Looking up I saw a frightful face with cold inexorable light blue eyes
really shock, rather than any injury, which had prostrated me, and in
so the sooner we got away from their neighborhood the better.  On three
we had not a doubt that he would be as good as his word.
at the appearance of my three companions in front.  Was this the
limping heavily, while I still dragged my feet from weakness after the
them rise from their seats, waving their paddles and spears madly in
"They may be undeveloped types," said he, stroking his beard and
eloquent features and gestures that we could understand it all as
had finished they burst into a roar of applause, waving their rude

behind."
nothing more than the marks of the owner.  Helpless, torpid, and
lighted match, to cause a sharp explosion and a blue flame at the far
for the carrion, all was still around the camp.  But it was different

report!  Here then is my first despatch from a field of battle:
clubs and stones, and made for the center of the Indian line.  It was a
in which for a time we hardly held our own.  Springing out from among

had come across to join us.
have seen and helped to decide even such a contest.  Now upon this
closed in on them, and in a minute it was over, Thirty or forty died
head.  "The debbil get you sure if you stay up there."
I write this from day to day, but I trust that before I come to the end
reach the plains below.  There had been, so far as we could follow
It was a rude, raw, primeval version of the Jews in Babylon or the
hollowed out of some soft rock which lay between the volcanic basalt
Since we had learned that the huge iguanodons were kept as tame herds
up the staircases and into the caves in a mad stampede.
ever-varying rainbow bloom as they moved.
of their lives, with no special brain center but scattered throughout
would lead them to their victims, mounting clumsily up for a few yards

water-snake shot out from the rushes and carried off in its coils the
creature, twelve feet from head to foot--phororachus its name,
burrows to watch us, while above us the boughs of the bushes were heavy
discovered:  The Indians would do nothing to help us.  In every other
dwell forever upon the plateau.  So far all had been kindly, however
Indian come back and bring rope and fetch you down."  Such was the
up here?"
his face.
He turned away and I left him wandering on through the wood with his
Challenger for not getting us out of our difficulties) in cleaning and
lake.  This huge sack had been sewn up at one end and only a small
acid voice.
cliffs.  We have satisfied ourselves that we cannot climb down and that
jerking strongly upon its lashings.
parachute, and the balloon be drawn back by means which I shall have no
of it, being passed three times round the Professors arm.
though none apparently to the lifting powers of this infernal machine.
We have descended in safety, though in a most unexpected fashion, and
pointing solemnly up at the row of caves above him, he had put his
"Unless we have come upon a primitive practical joker," Summerlee
"He pointed up to the caves when he gave it to me," said I.

made our way up weed-covered steps to the particular cave which was
was not the result of any convulsion, as in the case of the ascending
I looked at the mark to which his finger pointed, and I gave a sudden
black opening loomed in the wall.  We turned into it to find that we
which opened upon the cliffs.  It was a small rift, not larger than a
particular package, of which I may not speak, which gave us more labor
plunged into the cave which led to home.
that when we reach Para we shall stop to refit.  If we do, this letter
I thank Senhor Penalosa and other officials of the Brazilian Government
uproar which the mere rumor of our experiences had caused through
small, and it was only in the Queens Hall in Regent Street that

                       EXTRAORDINARY INCIDENT
theoretically confined to members and their friends, but the latter is
entrance of the four heroes of the occasion was the signal for a
our own representative, the well-known athlete and international Rugby
investigations of the searcher for truth.  He would only add, before he
handsome tribute to his friend Professor Challenger, coupled with an
them there by reason of the fall of their bridge, the Professor
instanced a snake, the cast skin of which, deep purple in color, was
encountered.  Thence he passed to the huge and ferocious bird, the
did at last find their way back to civilization.
"THE CHAIRMAN:  Then let us take it at once.
audience.  The attitude of the greater part of the public might be
said certain things.  Now four men said other and more startling ones.
the most slender description.  What did it amount to?  Some
his interesting address, the whole matter shall be regarded as
Professor Challenger was on his feet.  His appearance and manner are
the head of the Committee of Investigation, has been put up to speak
(Laughter.)  In spite of the destruction of so many invaluable
"PROFESSOR CHALLENGER:  No doubt, sir, we have to bow to your
"DR. ILLINGWORTH:  Undoubtedly.
and everyone was absorbed in the spectacle before them.  Professor
childhood in person.  There was a turmoil in the audience--someone
window! roared the Professor from the platform, dancing and wringing
made ample amends.  Every one was on his feet.  Every one was moving,
phalanx, blocking the streets from side to side, the crowd set forth,
occasion when, in his protective crinoline, he had gone to bring the
on duty outside Marlborough House, had deserted his post without leave,
re-named the Central, for never shall she have immortality through me.
Let me tell it in a few words.  No letter or telegram had come to me at
She looked up with amazement in her face.  She was altered in some
grinned in front of each other.
"Ive told William all about you," said she.  "We have no secrets.  I

profession?"
chest, swelling and puffing as he laid down the law to Summerlee.  And
No use to raise hopes and let them down again.  But its facts, not




He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any immediate
“Who then is Porlock?” I asked.
“My blushes, Watson!” Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.
of The Dynamics of an Asteroid, a book which ascends to such rarefied
“But no chain is stronger than its weakest link.”
BIRLSTONE 9 47 171
to the words in a page of some book. Until I am told which page and
not bring us either a further letter of explanation, or, as is more

“After all,” he said at last, “there may be nothing in it. It may be
its envelope; which was done, he tells us, before this ill-omened visit.
wonder!” said he, leaning back and staring at the ceiling. “Perhaps
hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the cipher refers.
column, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we begin to
common book.”
his page 534 will exactly agree with my page 534.”
“An almanac!”

thin, nervous fingers twitched as he counted the words--“‘danger.’ Ha!
something to the intelligence of your correspondent. The purport is
achieved. He was a young but trusted member of the detective force, who
was no humiliation in seeking the assistance of one who already stood
The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a look of

the crystals falling into position from his oversaturated solution.
his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow tangle.
so-called Porlock?”

towards me. “I won’t conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in
into the cold, cruel world.”


and I can’t get over the gap. What in the whole wide world can be the
“Then how could he buy--”
“No, I never have.”
master in the west of England. His chair is worth seven hundred a year.


this Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken fighting men,

interesting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts is your remark
into them.”
may lead us to him.”
fitting object for those remarkable powers which, like all special
“DEAR INSPECTOR MACDONALD [said the letter which he read to us]:
“Well, have you anything more?”

personality and to describe events which occurred before we arrived upon
for a considerable area of country, since Tunbridge Wells, the nearest
seventeenth century. Of the double moats which had guarded its more
into an island during the night--a fact which had a very direct bearing
cultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity among the
impossible. Thus it came about that John Douglas of the Manor House had
the confidence between the two did not appear to be complete, since the
Lodge, Hampstead.
for him through a hostile crowd. He neither rode nor shot, but spent his
relation to the events of the night of January 6th.
the hall, with the frightened butler wringing his hands in the doorway.
injured. Lying across his chest was a curious weapon, a shotgun with the
“When was that?” The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.
“No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me, and I rushed
blood like the mark of a boot-sole upon the wooden sill. “Someone has
“Horrible enough!” said the doctor, looking at the shattered head and
“I’ve heard,” said the sergeant, “that it was usually raised at sunset.
else will fit the facts.”


precious time? Couldn’t we start out and scout the country before the
The dead man’s right arm was thrust out from his dressing gown, and

the nugget and there’s the snake, but the wedding ring is gone.”
The worthy country policeman shook his head. “Seems to me the sooner we
call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from headquarters in a
or I am mistaken. And you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicos will have

upon the murderer before he dropped it on the mat. But there was no
barrels, and the rest of the name had been cut off by the saw.”
your memory?”
boots in the corner, the gun!”
“The gun was made to conceal. That’s why the barrels were sawed. It
“Well, state your case, Mr. Mac,” said Holmes in his most judicial
he will be seen before he can get across the moat? Is that credible, Mr.
“Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to our going down to
their expense. At the same time, Mr. White Mason, I claim the right to
us, with an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side of it. As we

“Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the clay.”
departed.
in his profession. Holmes listened to him intently, with no sign of that

Barker alone, though he claims to have been the first, but Ames and all
a common burglar, or he may have had some private grudge against Mr.
that he was not attacked the instant that he entered the room. When Mr.

“I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory, Mr.

make a little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would rather do the

of the society that vengeance has been done. That all hangs together.
“Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes ready,

bicycle behind him. Come and have a look. It is within a hundred yards
Holmes.”


particularly agitated. Just as she reached the bottom of the stair Mr.
lowered the drawbridge. Mr. Barker had then hurried off to get the
and excited, come out of the study. He intercepted Mrs. Douglas, who was
So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination save
never spoke. He had emigrated to America when he was a very young man.
he had come to offend it. He could only suppose that the legend upon the
seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman. She died of typhoid
“On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life.”
and that I did not know where to find him. They meant him no good--it

revolver was never out of his pocket. But, by bad luck, he was in his
“Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?”

conceal.”
I just had to. But you can take it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last
that it was conceivable that he had himself taken off the ring.”
“There was one small point,” remarked Sherlock Holmes. “When you entered
“Within a minute or so.”
from one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me, something of
“Have you found anything out yet?” she asked.

such a moment. He implored me not to go on. He assured me that I could

of it? I knew it by his refusal to talk about some episodes in his
think that we never shall,’ he has answered.”
McGinty was the name--Bodymaster McGinty. I asked him when he recovered

you to this trouble at such a time,” said the inspector. “There are some

“Where are the slippers now?”
both were dark with blood.
game, Mr. Holmes--what’s the game?”
The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to inquire;
I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden. At the
too late--they resumed their solemn masks as my figure came into view.
tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend laughing together behind a

“I beg--I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that you will
seated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I rounded the far
I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be ready to put you in touch
mischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight of his
they lying, and what is the truth which they are trying so hard to
time shows that there had been no lengthy interview. Was Douglas, from
against him.
it should have easily penetrated to Mrs. Allen’s room. She is, as she
“I am convinced myself,” said I, “that there is an understanding between

contrary, there is a good deal of evidence that the Douglases were very
to your idea, there was never any hidden menace, or secret society, or
“I confess that I can’t explain it.”
“I can conceive of no explanation.”

case, the couple--not necessarily a guilty couple--realize after the
that study would help me much.”

“It sounds to me like the beginning of the end,” said Holmes. “I’m sure

had left the hotel after breakfast yesterday morning on his bicycle, and
could give it. They don’t seem to have taken any very particular stock

so far as we can learn; but he need not pass through the village
some excuse if he met anyone. He met no one. He slipped into the first
that they fabricated evidence of his escape through the window, whereas
may contribute something to the common cause.”
“Well, Holmes,” I murmured, “have you found anything out?”
Chapter 7--The Solution
“He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham, Southampton,
task. Therefore I am here to advise you this morning, and my advice to
“Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall get him; but
Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in general agreement with our
ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.
subject. But when I tell you that there is some account of the taking
your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-corner way of
Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal state, and in it I
“Well, we’re bound to take you on your own terms,” said the inspector;
“I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it.”
from recommending one. In the evening, tired but happy--”
“Well?”
“--in the hope that we may find something which may bear upon our
annoyed.
down behind the screen of laurels, and we all three followed his
scene so as to glorify our results. The blunt accusation, the brutal tap
face of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the moat chilled us to
were immediately opposite the window and not more than a hundred feet
bell. There was the rasping of bolts from the other side, and the amazed
writing table.
other events you had hardly the time to give it the consideration which
you.”
U.S.A.’ I have spent an instructive afternoon in the rector’s library,
acrid irony.
“You can do what you damn please about that,” said Barker defiantly.
police voluntarily into your complete confidence. It may be that I am
“It’s best this way, Jack,” his wife repeated; “I am sure that it is
as that pass through your hands before, and I’ll lay my last dollar on
“I’ve heard of you, Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that I should meet you.
may be again. I had persuaded myself that we should find Mr. Douglas
and the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his wife
It all comes down to this: That there are some men that have good cause
hard question, dear,” he took her hand for an instant in his own, “and I
was always more restful when that bridge was up in the evenings--I put
dodged round the table as quick as an eel, and a moment later he’d got
I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door and stopped her. It was no
“It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to see it all
hand, I brought a bit of plaster down and put it where I am wearing one

hide to get you?”
terrible narrative--so singular and so terrible that you may find it

county of Merton. It was a single track railroad; but at every
bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were seated. The
which twinkle inquiringly from time to time as he looks round through

mingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the scene was new to
“Yes,” said he, “we need them sometimes in the place I come from.”


“I see you speak the truth,” said the workman. “But it’s well to make
flourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa Valley.
“A penitentiary job?”

we’ll meet in lodge one of these evenings. But mind my words: If you are
“For that matter,” said the other policeman, “I allow that hell must BE
to, and by the Lord you’d have to wait a long time if it was me!” He
patrolmen with a grin. “You’re a real hand-picked one, if I am a judge.”
A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and there
gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds of drifting smoke,
there.”

“Well, I know nothing about them. It’s only what I have read.”

German accent. “Did you come to see him? He is down town. I expect him
Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter’s daughter. My mother’s dead, and I run the

magnetism which drew good humour from all around him.
“Someone else?” he would cry. “Well, the worse luck for someone else!
worked in a planing mill. And afterwards came the hint of romance, the
seemed glad to see him once more. After a glass or two of whisky he
two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties were so pressing as
patrolmen after I left the train.”
don’t! Now, take a friend’s advice and go at once!”



McMurdo laughed incredulously. “How can you prove that?” he asked.

McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both from his







a walk.”

“I’ll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to me. See
For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence. Then she threw
there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but here; so why should
indeed down the whole thirty miles of the valley and past the mountains
obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a more gorgeous vest, and
himself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded to the cheek-bones, and
Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forward with
“I’m sorry, Councillor. I’m strange to the ways of the place. But I was
“Sure,” said McMurdo.

“See here, my joker,” said he, “if I thought you were playing any game
“What Bodymaster?”

fashion, and it amused him. “Why won’t you tell me?”


“‘Cause I’d read in the papers that they weren’t too particular in those
a mighty useful brother, I’m thinking! We can do with a bad man or two
pocket of his peajacket. “I was covering you all the time. I guess my

McMurdo. “I’ll fight him with fists, or, if that won’t satisfy him,
“Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin,” said McGinty, with a wicked stare. “Is it you

matter.”

words of the other had moved him.
Chapter 3--Lodge 341, Vermissa
broken. On the contrary, it drew closer and more intimate as the weeks
After the first introduction there were few evenings when he did not
him; but the relations between policemen and criminals are peculiar
we have our own police of the township, and no need for any imported
grinning. “You’re Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right enough, and don’t you
Central!” he cried.
“Well, I’ve given you the pointer, and you’re a sulky dog not to thank
free of the community from that time on. He could drink hard and show
not less than five hundred scattered over the coal district.
Among the older men were many whose features showed the tigerish,
At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements; but at
murmur of many voices from the assembly within. Once or twice he caught
rustle and murmur of the people round him, and then the voice of McGinty

“I am.”

congratulations of the brothers.
Scanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother.”
more surprise than he ventured to show to what followed.
“J.W. WINDLE D.M.A.O.F.”
“It’s your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some time. It
“Sure, it’s not for the likes of you to ask what the man has done. He
full and proper.”

“Sure, that was what I meant; I’m in your hands,” said McMurdo.
to see that she is not the loser.”

“And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came into the market
We are gradually driving all the small men out of trade. What is the
chill to the most reckless of them.
lodge has finished its business for the evening, save for one small
popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement and high office.
“LAW AND ORDER!”
which would raise horror in our minds if we read of it as existing
is respected in the township and the district. His paper stands for all
 Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his huge black brows into

“Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You’ll come, Gower, and you,
stopped and gathered in a yard which faced a high building. The words,
rushed out on the landing.
Baldwin looked at him in amazement. “Curse you!” he cried. “Who are you
of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall below and nerving

that their exertions will be attended by any better results than in
was a knock outside, and his landlady brought to him a note which had
Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the town.
“I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo,” said the older man,
“Look here!” said McMurdo sternly. “It was only last night, as you know
“And to take it back to Boss McGinty!” said Morris bitterly.

you call it?”
The word had gone round that I was a Freeman, and I was forced to join
them. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down I knew well what would

that you make too much of the matter.”

and may you find things go better with you in the future.”

by offering me a clerkship in a drygoods store.”
“Well, I guess because I tell you not. That’s enough for most folk in

“Well, that’s enough,” said McGinty, draining off his glass. “I came
in uniform advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his hand. It was


Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly if you don’t want a gun
they won’t be able to hold you.”
before, all arrested that afternoon and waiting their trial next
clever attorney who had been engaged by McGinty, they were even more
apology from the bench for the inconvenience to which they had been put,

it out. “He’ll be the boy for the clean job,” said the oldsters to one
give him up altogether, and yet her own good sense warned her of what
his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same instant with the
it--guilt and fear!
“I know it! Why else should you hold it from me? Was it to your wife
secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell on me, can’t you understand
“Sure, hard words break no bones.”
give it up when it would be to break my oath and to desert my comrades?

“There is no honour in such a matter.”

sending over two good men, Lawler and Andrews, who had instructions
enjoy every minute of it. Both men were total abstainers, and behaved



men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over them, and from the heart
house. The men had drawn down their hats and turned up their collars to
two balls in the face which dropped him dead at their very feet.
screams of the dead manager’s wife pursued them as they hurried to the
men to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded that in return three
the mountains. They were unkempt and weather-stained. But no heroes,
they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the Vermissa men were to
It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had fallen even
warned for service. We’ll never be right in this district until Chester
within earshot. It’s no good by day. He’s armed and shoots quick and

“Of course I will do it.”
he returned from his reconnaissance. Next day he interviewed his two
within. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a hole in it
miners of Iron Dike.

so long in an iron grip; but nowhere was there any hope for the men and
popular he became, however, with the Freemen, the blacker were the

the end of us all. God help me, but I am near out of my wits over it!”
is little that they can do. But you’ve heard of Pinkerton’s?”
“Sure, what is murder? Isn’t it common enough in these parts?”

to be stopped right now.

telling me the news that came to him by way of business. How would he
“It’s just what I would ask.”
“It’s him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all if we left
when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him. The dancing Irish

are going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my bones. There may be
should be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be just a word
of the lodge. He rejoiced that they should all be there to take counsel

rope round the necks of many of us, and send every man in this room into
“Let me say, Mr. Chairman,” said one of the older brethren, “that I have
“What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our affairs?”
“Eminent Bodymaster,” said McMurdo, earnestly, “I would put it to you
The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for there was a
lodging at Hobson’s Patch.”
me all that I want.’”
clerk. ‘Yes,’ said I; ‘it’s special news for his paper, and he’s scared
“Well, what is it?”
Scanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise--and I’ll let you know

However, all this they would learn from his own lips. Once in their
through the fringe of his bristling beard. Drink and politics had
What about him? If any man gives us away, it would be he. I’ve a mind to
is settled up. We can’t afford to set the police buzzing, to-day of all
books of rules and forms of membership. He expects to get right down to
prove the killing,” said he. “No one can see him come to the house after
“That’s so.”
allow that I can hold him till you come.”
across. McMurdo examined these attentively. No doubt it must have struck
it, same as you or McGinty. If the lodge will think none the worse
of justice or honesty to anyone beyond. The treasurer, Carter, was

McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains tighter. “Sure
“Not a sound, for your lives!” McMurdo whispered, as he went from the
upon his lip.
might have been empty, so profound was the silence. The hissing of a
me--There, that will do. There are forty armed men round this house,
Captain Marvin here and my employers knew that. But it’s over to-night,
“Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal valleys. When
Menzies, for I did not know enough; but I will see that their murderers
of it. I wouldn’t have three such months again if they let me loose
which had been sent by the railroad company, and made a swift, unbroken



letter box. “Dear me, Mr. Holmes. Dear me!” said this singular epistle.

accident occurred.’
“So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictive nest
same.”
Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger. “Do


resources might have gathered from the appearance of the brothers some

clanged above his head. At last the uproar died away in three last,


more fitted by its age and solemnity to convey the thoughts of two high
“A light and a pattern to every novice.”
over his illuminated breviary. So he remained while the senior monks
“This plaint is thine, as I learn, brother Ambrose,” said he. “May the
lay-brothers entered leading between them a young novice of the order.


beans, for the greater honoring and glorifying of St. Monica, mother of
said brother John was observed upon the Brockenhurst road, near the spot

cast down? Hast forgot it, I say? If your eyes were upon your sandals,
English with a broad West Saxon drawl. The brothers, who were English
but does not forget it.

any of the granges of Beaulieu, and thy name shall be struck off the
difficulty. Ho there! lay-brothers--Francis, Naomi, Joseph--seize him
the three brothers flew back at the very glare of him; and the two rows
skirts; but before he had time to rub his eyes the recreant had passed
and more than hinted that unless a reformation occurred some others of
comely and well shapen, with straight, lithe figure and eager, boyish
while in the other he held his coif or bonnet, which bore in its front a
is no help. I had given my foreword and sacred promise to your father,
nature which would make him no fit companion for you. It was his desire

know. There is the playing of the citole and the rebeck. Our choir will
Cambrig or of Oxenford could say as much? But of thy reading--hast not
of his staff. “Holy father,” said he, “he would come upon those parts
Empire, and so to the country of the Huns and of the Lithuanian pagans,
Abbot complaisantly. “Know that many strange nations lie betwixt there
never intended that we should inquire. But you have a long road before
Alleyne Edricson bent his head while the Abbot poured out his heartfelt
Underneath, in the porch of the Abbey, the monks had gathered to give
in the evening sun. There too was the broad sweep of the river Exe, the
striding sturdily along, swinging his staff and whistling as merrily as
outlying branch of an oak and peeped at the traveller with a yellow and
though the man were sore perplexed in his mind. Once he shook both hands
“Hast so indeed?” cried he. “Then perhaps canst tell me the name of
“But how came this?” asked the young clerk, who could scarce keep from
my knees that he would give me the use of his gown, which after many
disconsolate one upon the shoulder. “Canst change thy robe for a jerkin
beech-tree the hut of a charcoal-burner. Give him my name, good sir,
“Peter the fuller!” she kept repeating. “Marry come up! if I were Peter
“Heaven forfend that such a thing should come to pass!” said Alleyne.
Alleyne stooped and kissed her, for the kiss was the common salutation
“See him!” yelled Peter. “Look to him! You shall be my witness. He shall
“But how came this?” asked Alleyne, open-eyed with astonishment.

The road along which he travelled was scarce as populous as most other

lay a long clump of greenery, and from behind this there stuck straight
“A gift, my prince!” shouted the other. “Any trifle will serve--a purse


Alleyne sat down willingly as directed with two great bundles on
“How knew you the tune?” asked the other.
“Nay, it may not be. I have other work to do. I have tarried with you
to divide this brisk uncertain existence from the old steady round of
the black depths behind them. To the seeing eye decay is as fair as
parts which was especially famous for the stewing of eels. The clerk
was a wooden-legged cripple who came hobbling down the path, so weak and


have I been on the road. I go to my son, who is one of the King’s
bread and cheese as I have left, and here, too, is a penny which may
southland parts. Alleyne had read of such folk, but had never seen one
more, and made for the two villains, with his staff whirled over his
his dagger again he came stealing with prowling step and murderous eye,
steed instead of it carrying him. In the rapid glance Alleyne saw that

Third.”
unslinging his bow. “He is in hiding somewhere, for he knew well, black
color caught the eye of the bailiff, who broke into a long screeching
like a harp-string. The black man sprang high up into the air, and


At the command of the bailiff they plucked off the fellow’s shoe, and
of hard-faced archers with their hands to the bridles of their horses,

twinkling lights all over where the glow from within shone through the
It might be an evil start to come to his door so late and claim the
dwelling.
up such a shout as Alleyne entered that he stood peering at them through
the use at the ‘Pied Merlin’ this many a year back that the company
for all thy baby-face there is the making of a man in thee. Then there

dressed in the weather-stained green doublet of foresters, lifted the
at different periods. There was no furniture, save a single long
and verderers from the forest, sunburned and bearded, with the quick
rough unkempt fellows with tangled beards and matted hair--free laborers
have been fool enough to trust him! Now, young man, what manner of a
that he craved, leaving him alone too, because he said that a man’s mind
own Majesty himself, who often has ridden past this way, and who loves
the north country, but for many years he hath gone the round of the
that there are more sound ones than sorry, for he is quick at his work
of them is the device of some noble lord or gallant knight who hath
which went on round the fire. The peasant in the sheepskins, who had
“He would have sold me with his acres,” the other cried, in a
vestment as much as under the helmet and plate of proof. We have as much


Arabian.”
“A raw rat,” the man of drugs was saying, “that is what it is ever my


A general laugh followed this sally at the dentist’s expense, in the
mind. Then, with a sudden sweep across the strings, he broke out into


“And so belabored as to be scarce able to crawl along it,” cried a
was drawn from their own quarrel to the new-comer who had burst so
as befitted one who was wont to set his face against danger. A straight
He then turned back and saluted the landlady once more with the utmost
into the room, each bearing a huge bundle upon his head. They formed in

tagged, and, lastly, a store of naping linen. So, the tally is complete!
off together, for their homes were distant and the hour late. The
man who was fierce one instant and gentle the next, with a curse on his
bolt down any street of Bordeaux, I warrant, but you would pink archer,
“Sir Claude Latour and the White Company!” shouted the travellers,
“Methinks I have some remembrance of the lilt,” remarked the gleeman,

        And the land where the hemp was wove.
            To the hearts that are true
the salt, the tranchoir of bread, and finally the smoking dish which
drink deep. I treat my friend, and I ask no friend to treat me. I clap
still hopping under his doublet, laid his great hands upon the Sieur
“There is one thing, fair sir,” said the Cambridge student in his
“for there is no child over the water but could answer what you ask.
the more so if Sir Nigel Loring, of Christchurch, should don hauberk
Hawkwood; and there is the more chance that he will if I bring one or
horse, when there is man’s work to be done within a few short leagues of

“Afeard, thou lurden!” growled big John. “I never saw the face yet of
with me to France, there to serve in the White Company as long as we be

Big John stood waiting in the centre with a sullen, menacing eye, and
guard, and then, bounding upon him, threw his legs round his waist and
taken unto himself wings and flown. As he hurtled through the air, with
“It was a trick,” cried John.
and staring about with a vacant gaze, which showed that he knew neither


“To Minstead,” quoth he. “My brother Simon Edricson is socman there, and

could read written things, since you are so ready with your brushes and
“I can make some show at it,” said big John; “though I was scarce long

from his very faithful friend Sir Claude Latour, captain of the White
is clean it is time that we trussed up and were afoot. You come with
upon the road.
my sweeting, and I must settle some day when the wars are over and done.
Lyndhurst the wayfarers had to pick their way, for the little town
Chandos, who is first at the board or in the saddle. Three martlets on a
all chattering like a cloud of jays. Alleyne bent knee and doffed hat at
to day, eating and drinking, breathing and sleeping. It is only when
the whole truth of the matter. The soldiers came upon him in the garden.
the sword.”
proof.”

from head to foot in a long white linen cloth, and a high white cap
where the calm strength and majesty of Nature might serve to rebuke the
It was in old French, and ran somewhat in this way:
them, “you have beaten enough for to-day. The road is all spotted like a

others. Saints are they, if in this age any may merit so high a name.”
“Doubtless you mean no sin,” said Alleyne. “If your words are wild, it
a man speak better since old Dom Bertrand died, who was at one time
thousand, but it was three days before we could come to terms, and I
still wound in front of them through the rustling, yellow-tinted forest,
blood and the fresh morning air both invited him to a scamper. His staff
delight. “This is the proper way to raise children. By my hilt! I could


“And how fell you into his hands?” asked John.
“Half a score.”
be able to show ye how such shots should be made.” He loosened his
long day would scarce give me time for my sermon. We have marksmen in
broad strips of bracken glowed red and yellow against the black peaty
I first saw you, but since then I have conceived over much regard for
while ever and anon the measured tapping of Nature’s carpenter, the

towards those who have wronged him.”
against the Scots, then?” he asked.
with sickle in one fist and brown bill in the other. On the other hand,
ever noticed that those who know the most have the least to say about
“But they must be sorry folk to bow down to the rich in such a fashion,”
the long course of speculation and of mysticism on which he had been
“They too are very hardy soldiers, the more so as for many hundred years
it if you will but come with me to France.”
or what else might please the eye of a learned clerk, there are a good
good yonder, since there are three hundred men in the Company, and none
indeed and indeed it cannot be, so here I take my leave of you, for
“Yet it may be as well that you should know whither we go,” said the
and the sun gleaming brightly upon his head-piece and the links of
cathedral. Beneath lay a broad carpet of the softest and greenest moss,
who had held the manors of Bisterne and of Minstead at the time when the
is, as holding the land in free socage, with no feudal superior, and


Alleyne. “As it stands, not one farthing shall you have with my free
passionately. “Ill have I had from them, and ill I shall repay them. I
of brushwood, and the short, sharp cries of the hunters. Close behind
rode his horse with the careless grace of a man whose life had been
“The deer, clowns?” said a hard-visaged, swarthy-faced man, who rode at
and spur would drive them, in the hope of winning the king’s prize. Away
“Black hound of Gascony,” he muttered, “evil the day that you and those
ere the shadows turn from west to east. I pray you not to hold him back,
wide-spread mutiny, and now his brother’s name was spoken as though he
fabric of the feudal system was tottering to a fall. Hence the fierce
at it with flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes--for this, he knew, must
a woman, tall and slight and dark, with lithe, graceful figure and
radiant and stainless spirit had ever yet been able to conjure up. Good,
voice rose at times into accents of menace and of anger. She stood
“The best rose has ever the longest thorns,” said he. “Quiet, little
his large, well-marked features, he was the most comely man whom Alleyne
cowering up against him like the trembling leveret who sees the falcon
“Would you dispute it, dog? Would you wish by trick or quibble to juggle
soul of my father! it will be a strange thing if I am to be bearded upon

his faults, had a man’s heart; and there were few who could look him in
“You may say what you will to me,” he said between his clenched


upon a mossy bank, between two holly-bushes, and looked ruefully at her
wood which way we have taken. But you--you had him at your mercy. Why


sunlit sward.
less as I think for my own sweet sake than because he hath ambition and
outlaws and others at his back, my father forbade that I should hawk or
his land, but with so many courteous words besides, and such gallant
“It was a small thing,” he answered, with a tingle of pleasure at these
there is wrong unredressed, and the wronger the Socman of Minstead. So
upon me as a preaching devil. Why, my father is a bitter man when he is
tremulous with a thousand new-found thoughts and fears and wonderments,
have vengeance on the Socman.”
sudden little cry, which had more of surprise than of joy in it, “Here
sir,” she continued, springing into her saddle, “it is not fit that I
constable to the Earl of Salisbury.”

Beaulieu bread, and he washed it down by a draught from a woodland
Fidley, and of the great catch of herring brought back by the boats of
full of the piping of the song-birds. Long, glinting dragonflies shot
running down his cheeks. Further on he met a sturdy black-bearded man,
sacrifice, and strengthened himself by his example which he could scarce
appeared to have forgot all about it, and were disputing together with
lonesome man, coz.”


“Come, brother Stephen, he hath some tincture of letters,” said the
“Certes, Stephen Hapgood, his wisdom doth not suffice,” cried the other.
if I have swooned, or sleep, or am in wine, then, my thought having gone
midden, crowed away in a last long burst of quotation and deduction.
all things are but thoughts, then that also is but a thought and may be
began to shred out into scattered belts of trees, with gleam of
came upon his comrades of the morning seated astraddle upon a fallen

“Well said, lad!” cried big John. “We three shall to the wars together,
jerkin.
“But you,” said Alleyne, “there have been changes with you also. Why

the vespers bugle; for it is likely that Sir Nigel, being so renowned a
lane which leads from the Twynham kennels to the bank of Avon. Two
emptied over him when he led the Earl of Derby’s stormers up the breach
and trunk-hosen were of a purple plum color, with long weepers which
tippet, could not conceal the gaunt and ungraceful outlines of her
“I tell you, my fair lord,” she was saying, “that it is no fit training
coming to, when young maids may flout their elders. I wonder that you do
peaceful life is not for me, and were it not for your gracious kindness
“My lady, when our liege lord, the king, at three score years, and my
more need that I should turn to where there is good pay to be earned and
you won, and yet have scattered the crowns among page and archer and

He looked keenly at Sir Nigel as he approached, and then, plunging his
to the south of the great Spanish mountains ere another year be passed.”
few paces back from their comrade, saw the lady catch her breath, while
are indeed men of whom a leader may be proud. Your name, good archer?”
you, for it is of a grievous weight.”
“I have felt his arms round my ribs,” said the bowman, “and they crackle
“I would fain to France with my friends here,” Alleyne answered; “but I
St. Paul, there are men so caitiff that they think more of a scrivener’s
Alleyne full of wonderment at the humble bearing of so renowned

women, howling and barking of curs, and over all a sullen, thunderous
creature, which came bounding along with ungainly speed, looking the
A scared man was the keeper; for, having chained the brute to a stake
“I must crave your pardon, comrade,” said he, bluntly. “I was a fool not
red roses of the veteran constable. As they passed over the drawbridge,
man.
keep, gaunt and windowless, rearing up from a lofty mound, which made it
“And so say I,” said Alleyne.
“My name, friend,” quoth the bowman.

some few years back? I had an old mother there, lad, who had come down
taken service under the lions and towers of Castile. But, comrade, it is
“A vow to the saints,” cried Alleyne, “is indeed not to be set aside;
buttery with the huge board upon which the pastry was rolled, “if either
 he cried, “the cause of quarrel? Why, mon petit, it was years ago in
“It was La Blanche Rose, maid at the sign of the ‘Trois Corbeaux’ at
he hath sworn that if there be quarrelling in the garrison he would


continually pouring into England, every one of whom exerted an influence
brightly colored tapestry, representing the achievements of Sir Bevis
the loadstone draws the needle, until, almost before he knew it, he
without being seen. He stood irresolute, uncertain whether to advance or
again. Oh that I were a minstrel, that I might put it into rhyme,
were coming thither, so I bethought me that I might hold it back as

way, and neither sees nor hears you? Were ye all as thoughtless of your
from the man Wicliffe, of whom I have heard such evil things.”


in an instant, however, in another of her varying moods.
questioning eyes at Alleyne for his approval.
whose counsel it is not my wont to decide aught of import; but, indeed,
noble and gallant in England will be your companions.”


fate which had fallen upon their comrades; “these locks need some little
which I might be so ill-fitted to fulfil.”
us.”
profit from his teaching. I would have you do what you can with her, and
And now there came a time of stir and bustle, of furbishing of arms and
for a race of warriors. From sea to sea there was stringing of bows in
loaded up, and one after the other spread their white pinions and darted
Sir Oliver Buttesthorn were all marching south with levies from Andover,
supported the dignity of a banneret. But poverty was heavy upon him, his
and Holmesley glades, he had filled up his full numbers, and mustered
brigandines of chain mail, the wadded steel caps, and the brassarts or
Six long weeks were taken in these preparations, and it was close on
which held their own in all the rough blasts of the work-a-day world?
nature recoiled from the grim work of war, yet in those days of martial
an approving nod from critical men-at-arms, or to hold his own against
communion with three maidens, all young, all fair, and all therefore
of gallant deeds and lofty aims, or he might hold forth upon moon and
until suddenly she would be conquered by his patience, and break into
would--ha, you may well flee the room!”
“Nay, nay, no one has misused me,” he answered. “But the fault lies
it. In vain he strove and reasoned with himself as to the madness of


 He spoke with a gasping voice, and his face flushed crimson in the
the eyes if I say one word of what is in my mind. ‘Twere as easy to woo

her?”
“Her father!” cried the tire-woman, with a little trill of laughter. “Oh
morn had not yet broken. Alleyne, from the window of the armory, looked
castle servants, the soldiers who were to form the garrison, and little
“It is the sight of these brave men,” she answered; “and to think how
now you are going too, who could carry my thoughts out of these gray
herself to speak too freely.
“Nay, Alleyne, it were a cruel kindness, and you have been too good and

rising portcullis. Pressing the veil to his lips, he thrust it into the
had followed the French wars before, and knew the marches of Picardy as
axe, according to his humor, and over the right hip there jutted out the
and the gazing crowd.

velvet dress of peace, with flat velvet cap of maintenance, and curling
shirts, cyclas, and under-jupons are in the brown basket on the left
“There are in it twenty-three marks, one noble, three shillings and
“Come, then, my heart’s comfort,” he answered. “But I must crave a gage

from his saddle, and then, striking spurs into his horse’s sides, he
grinned at the melancholy of his companions, and flourished his lord’s
you, Edricson, that you are mindful of the old-time house from which
yonder road amongst the nether shaw? It would be well, perchance, that
to have much speech with him; but his arms were an allurion in chief
better chance of advancement than might be had by spurring forth before

may obtain justice for you.”

saddle.
have some sign or warrant of your mission.”
must have one.” As he spoke he whirled the covering from the object
boar’s hide. For me, I have played the old game of war since ever I had
lives by the alms of those who worship there.”
“Alas! fair sir,” cried the blind old man, “I have not seen the blessed
top of his speed after his companions, and overtook them just at the

eye, “I go to France as an archer to give blows and to take them.”
“Stand to it, Aylward,” cried the archers, amid a fresh burst of
his own road for all that I could do to change him. First he must be a
on as he spoke, while Alleyne, having dispensed two more pence, left
splashed through the ford, and lay in the meadows on the further side to
who hath an ague. Behind him, with his toe ever rasping upon the other’s
with the cross sat himself down sullenly upon a tussock of grass by the
also lawful for me to threaten you with my sword.”
Peter Peterson, a very noted rieve, draw-latch, and murtherer, who has
heaven forfend from me or mine. Yet, if for an instant he lay the cross
athwart him.
Topping the heathy down, they came of a sudden full in sight of the old

man with a long chin and a drooping lip. He wore a fur tippet round his
“What the plague did you ask me for then?” said Simon. “But if it is
as the town, it follows that they are very ancient too. But there is a
“They have come in two great galleys,” answered the mayor, “with two
your archers, however, you might well hold the town and do them great
Genoese, as well as the Scotch, the Bretons, the Spanish, and the Moors.
Southampton, like not my handling of his ship then he may find another
gate it was brought to a stand by a wondrously fat man, who came darting

“Aye, by my faith,” cried Sir Nigel, with sparkling eyes, “we have


Company straight down to the water’s edge, where long lines of flat
the cog. These once aboard, the ship set her broad mainsail, purple
home. Did you not spy a crooked man upon the beach?”
the Greeks, and divers other ancient peoples who were famed for their
dispositions: would it please you that I should order them or will you?”
wars.”
“‘Tis the master-bowyer’s rede: ‘Every bow well bent. Every shaft well
forward.”
that we should seem to be a merchant-ship from Southampton and appear to
much pleasance from our meeting with them. It would be well to pass the
with bent heads and crossed hands, listening to the hoarse mutter from
larboard quarter lay the two dark galleys, which had already hoisted
“Yet it would not be to a knight’s honor or good name to lower his

ere they close with us, to raise up the mantlets and pavises as a screen
The knight looked at him with a face which struck the smile from his
“Seventeen score paces,” said the archer, running his eye backwards and
The throng of pirates had cleared away from the great wooden catapult,
of rage from their pursuers.
was St. Alban’s Head, with Portland looming mistily in the farthest

of criticism or advice. “Higher, Wat, higher!” “Put thy body into it,

“Then down with two more,” shouted their leader. “That will do. Ma foi!
with oars trailing to save them from snapping, they poured in a
On either side the seamen whom Sir Nigel had chosen for the purpose
Norman, and Italian staggered and reeled on a deck which was cumbered
But help was close at hand. Sir Oliver Buttesthorn with his men-at-arms
him from the side with a slashing blow from his deadly mace. Sir Nigel
before the bars of his helmet warned him that short would be his shrift
humankind, taken in the very deed, with proofs of their crimes still
thrust with their oars against the side of the cog, and a rapidly

upon him. Look to it, Alleyne! See to the whirl and glitter of it!”
The two knights had come aboard the cog, and the grapplings having been
the worse of this day’s work,” said Sir Nigel. “You shall take these
“He will come to anon,” said the knight, stooping over him and passing
be done.”

CHAPTER XVII. HOW THE YELLOW COG CROSSED THE BAR OF GIRONDE.

stretched over the whole seaward sky-line, with long ragged streamers
crumpled veil, and he breathed a vow that if valor and goodwill could
good Master Hawtayne! Never had I so much care since first I blew
“He is below pricking out the coat-armor of his mother’s uncle. ‘Pester
a four and the main,’ shouted the big man, with a voice like the flap of
yonder headland looms upon us through the mist! We must tack within


forefingers. “Rocks beneath our very bows!” Through the belly of a great
thrice-sainted Christopher!”
with us now!”
matters there which crave my attention.”
with which the gap had been plugged. “Speedily, my hearts, or we are

“If they would but lie closer we might find safety, even should the cog
the haze and spray. Suddenly he threw up his arms and shouted aloud in


and speeding swiftly up the broad and tranquil estuary of the Gironde.
Never had he in his quiet life seen so great a town, nor was there in
a squire now, and like enough to win the golden spurs, while I am still
I had now been! Certes, I had not gone to Twynham Castle, nor become
in the centre, which stands back from the river and hath a broad banner
“And how is it, good Aylward, that there comes so much music from the
ready for the land. Go tell them that the boats will be for them within

“His betters before the tranchoir, lad. Sniff not treason where none is
baron aboard. I would mine eyes were better. How read you this upon the

there was scarce a man who had not closed an eye for the greater love
smell.”
before, and sat his horse with a rigid neck; but the two young squires

itself upon the young squires. The town was now at the height of its

long white beard and searching eyes imparted to him an air of masterful
foppish knight, who was bent upon making his way past him.
“Then you must be Sir Stephen Mackworth, for I learn that when old

a great number of people who were waiting, like themselves, for an
The two knights were deep in talk, when Alleyne became aware of a
from the socket, that there was little left to remind one of the dashing
I may learn to be a gentle and a hardy knight?”

they caught sight of familiar faces among the crowd.
Judas Maccabaeus were set forth, with the Jewish warriors in plate of
as though heartily weary of the proceedings, stooping from time to time
high dignitaries and office-holders of Aquitaine. Below on either side

laughing heartily, as did many of the barons who surrounded them. “His
his words.
To the astonishment of the knight, his words provoked a burst of
company, and I have even now made vow to hang the man who held the rank
turned upon the man who was in authority over them.”
Pedro, he had not baulked you. Between friends, there is overmuch of
be a man of much wisdom and valor.”
skirts and whispers in his ear is Lord Oliver de Clisson, known also as
Mark well the man with the high nose and flaxen beard who hath placed
the lowest ranks until he was second only to Chandos himself in the
for the carriage of troops, or a tun of sweet wine which had the bottom
apartment. His swarthy cheek and raven black hair spoke of the fiery
already know our cousin’s titles and style, and, certes, we know our

“My lord,” cried Don Martin, “I cannot stand there to hear such words
and hastened from the room.
heard the lengths to which your royal generosity runs.”

thousand crowns. Good Sir William Felton, here, will doubtless settle
“Enough, sire, enough!” said the prince, flushing with vexation. “If
past, we shall then join the army at Dax, and set our banners to the
levies from Picardy and Brittany. We hold Bertrand in high esteem, for
“By heaven! but this is too much,” cried an English nobleman. “Methinks

might find it beyond his control.
own use and customs. There are some who might call us cold and dull and
side-door to the great chamber in which the royal tables were set forth.

had been a banneret at the least,” observed another, amid a burst of
sticking to his shoes. He means that the noise is less for our being out
are sharp in Hampshire, sir.”
“And what of me, young sir?”

or advancement, but rather for the fame of my lady and for the upholding


days of need it may fail him. How much more then is it proper to test
what I have done unless he first crave my pardon for what he hath said
“Nay; it must not be within the grounds of the court, or it may go hard
orchard with a thick bristle of leafless apple-trees upon the other. The
Alleyne a model of comeliness and grace, with his golden hair and his
Tranter’s great sword was indeed a mighty vantage in his favor. He stood
in a whistling cut which would have severed the other in twain had he
“Bravely struck on both sides!” cried Roger Harcomb. “You have both

“Another sword!” cried Ford.
gave Tranter, ever seeking time for a last cut. On and on came Alleyne,
stream had gone from their minds. It was not until Tranter, giving back
for his late foeman.
longer in the water, he had done nothing during that fierce battle with
friend to you, for it has saved your life this day.”

“Ma foi! you have not too much of either, for you are as white as

“Faith,” said Ford, “this air of Bordeaux hath turned our turtle-dove
first, after the meagre fare of Beaulieu and the stinted board of the
with which the principal meal was concluded.
Behind them a group of swaggering, half-drunken Yorkshire dalesmen,
would be burst asunder and a lady’s horse-litter would trot past towards
The tall man leaned heavily upon her to take the weight off his tender
“Verily, they are heathens and barbarians,” cried the man; “mad,
“By the three kings!” cried one, “here is an old dotard shrew to have
“What hath the old toad under his arm?” cried one of the others. “He
“A raw squire, new landed,” said another. “By St. Thomas of Kent! we are

find yourselves in the stretch-neck, if you take not heed.”
John, had convinced the archers that there was little to be got by
of us at the ‘Rose de Guienne’ to-night, which is two doors from the
Alleyne in surprise.
and it was better that you should be pulled and pushed than that my head


delight of the two young Englishmen. His daughter had thrown off her
“It is great!” he cried. “It is wonderful! But I marvel, sir, that you
if you too knew something of the art.”
again, Alleyne had, with a few bold strokes of the brush, tinted in a
I say, that, if you will stay with me, I will teach you all the secrets
And I have seen them with my own eyes, these very eyes which look upon

A stern, clear bugle call had sounded close at hand to summon some


“Tita! Who spoke of Tita?”
service to-night, as he sleeps with the Lord Chandos.”
archers, together with Goodwin Hawtayne, the master-shipman, who had
“A tourney?”
“There are three hundred and forty-one in the town,” said Aylward, “and
and our own very good lord and leader.”
upon the old bowman’s rugged face.
“By my hilt! no. There was little Robby Withstaff, and Andrew
good fortune, for I had a golden pyx from the minster, for which I
there again a very great thing befell.”
“And what then, master-bowman?” asked Hawtayne. “By St. Christopher! it
same day by a black-eyed wench from the Ardennes. Mon Dieu! there are
that few came back. Then came the Germans, and they also fought very

crown of France?”
“Nay, we have one here who is second to none,” said Hawtayne, laying his
        There came a knight of high renown
        There came an archer bold and true,

“And a last cup to the maids of our heart!” cried Aylward. “A steady
by continual struggle against the Moors, or cavaliers from Portugal
Bordeaux had ever seen. On the eve of the contest the peasants flocked
the rivalries and bad blood created by the selection, and it was only
against the rival claims of his companions. Lord Audley of Cheshire,
streets on his way to the list, “I should have been glad to have
snapped I know not what would follow.”
Spain, and of Majorca, what think you of this challenge?”
and to have the maid brought to us at the abbey.”
I love to hear from your lips. I have no taste for such amours as you

at the young conqueror, “we shall unite the forces of England, of

between him and us.”
here and there by the colored hoods of the women, or by the sparkling
rode dark-browed cavaliers from the sunny south, fiery soldiers from
the Percies and the silver wings of the Beauchamps, each supported by
burst of cheering greeted the rival herald, who, advancing from the
shout over this tourney, for my gold vase has small prospect of crossing
the saddle. The burly De Clisson, however, restored the hopes of the

lists. He was a man of great size, clad in black armor without blazonry
up before the prince’s stand with a jerk which threw it back upon
keenest interest, apart from its being the crisis which would decide who
helmet. The second course was so equal that the keenest judges could not
to a new and unexpected arrival.
all the district of its inhabitants. Strange it was to see such a vast
great breadth of shoulder, with vizor closed, and no blazonry upon his
“On my word, sire,” replied Chandos, with the utmost surprise upon his
beard and a swaggering bearing.
nor French, but speaks with the tongue of the one, and fights under the
“And as to the prize, sire,” quoth Sir Nigel, “I am sure that I speak

swords without indignity.”


the right nor to the left during these preliminaries. He had changed
it at Auray? Mark me, lads, this man will prove to be one of the best
knee.”
gentle sport which you have devised.”
for the Lady Loring.”

wonder and admiration. Thunders of applause from the English soldiers,

sent in crashing blow upon blow, following fiercely up with cut and with



“And they come from a bitter heart,” answered the unknown knight. “How
his cause either with tongue or with sword. But if you think such evil
whose loss would be a heavy blow to his master. Sir William Felton, you
On the morning after the jousting, when Alleyne Edricson went, as was

Chandos, and that he is under vow not to speak it. So ran the gossip at
letters. What then? Is there aught amiss, that you should stare so?”
Lady Loring had word from me.”
war, with much honor and all hopes of advancement, for which I go to
them in such order as pleases her best. But I would have you add what it

“None that I dare say so.”
“As an angel.”

flight.”
As he spoke, a heavy footfall was heard without, and the portly knight

“To Chandos? In God’s name, Oliver, why have you done this?”

angry friend’s arm. “There is naught in this, for it was but saying that
Mother! I had forgot the pasty, and it will be as scorched as Judas

epicure, was very dainty in small matters, and loved, however bare the
Perchance Sir Nigel, with his love of all the dying usages of chivalry,
knew her too well to think that she would wed him without the blessing
and pondered and nodded his head like a traveller who makes his notes
his soil.”
to the eye to be dead is still full of the sap of life, even as the
thought of the great high King and Master of all, whose humble and
are as sprack a squire and as lusty an archer as ever passed down the
that I should bring you out three horns of it?”
“At Marmande or Aiguillon. He said that we could not pass him, seeing
peeping spire and feudal tower, and cluster of village houses, all clear
ostler, varlet, hark hither, and a wannion on your lazy limbs! Ha!


the Englishman. ‘It may be so,’ said the Sieur de Crespigny, turning his
Reolle, Bazaille, and Marmande, with the sunlit river still gleaming
too, is the mill of Le Souris. Old Pierre Le Caron, who owned it, was a


any way into the house. ‘Let us in, good Master Gourval!’ cried Simon,
For the easing of his soul, he asked me to pay the money to you as I
front of him?”
of the Holy Land, and I have had neither crust of bread nor cup of wine


“I had sat down here to die,” quoth the palmer; “but for many years I
of Joseph of Arimathea, who still lives in Jerusalem alive and well,
down upon him the revilements of the wicked children.”
would not my old mother give to have it hung over her bed?”
softly and with reverence, else had I rather left my unworthy bones here
his side, until the tears hopped down his sooty cheeks.
Then he begged from me one of my nails, and filling his scrip with
the rest of him, for he ran swiftly through a field and so into a wood,
land-master of the presbytery of Marienberg. He and Sir Nigel sat late
himself, and would have entered upon some small knightly debate with me,
been so long at Montaubon, that there would be little there worth the
country. Alleyne could not but mark that, whereas in Guienne there had
masterless men. Yonder towers, between the wood and the hill, mark the
bales over Laura’s back! My heart was nigh broke, for it seemed that I
ever I started on such an errand! I crave your gracious protection upon
Alderman Micheldene. It is not very far to Cahors, for surely I see the
But here on a lone roadside, with thick woods and robber-knights, I turn
a wheat-rick or moths in a woolfels, a harm and a hindrance to all


“It was only last Lammastide, sir knight, that I was left for dead near
great tree which shot one strong brown branch across their path. From
Apostles bear you up! May the blessed army of martyrs direct your feet
              Par l’ordre du Senechal de
with fustian of gold and silver bells, and rode onward with Sir Nigel’s
fore-word that I would bide with him until he had passed. There were two
of Christendom.”
“When I sell my cloth,” quoth he, “he who buys may weigh and feel and
holy things, to which your hog’s mind can never rise. Keep silence, lest
the angry alderman. The latter, however, was not a man to be quelled by
“I have heard that Wicliff hath many followers in Norwich,” answered
“Then, by St. Paul! they may settle it betwixt them,” quoth Sir Nigel.
wound over a vast and desolate plain. This path led them amid marshes
bridges--look where you might, the signs of ruin and rapine met the eye.
they came on families by the wayside, who were too weak from hunger and
last fruits of their toil? They sat at the lowest depth of human misery,
to stream down the road in front of them. Wary and careful they must
inn-keeper that an English knight with his party will lodge with him
nose, firm yet sensitive mouth, dark curving brows, and deep-set eyes
full of nuts. These he cracked between his strong white teeth and chewed
Taken aback at this ungentle speech, and scarce knowing how to answer it
interrupted him.

“Nay,” answered Sir Nigel, “I cannot go until I have seen more of this
whose claim he might be desirous of advancing.”
looked upon it in the lists by Garonne. Ah! Sir Nigel, Sir Nigel! you
Sir Nigel, and here is my hand! I give you my word that there are but
“And perhaps, most honored sir, it would please you to continue the
Into the chamber they went in all peace and concord, where the Lady
five minutes had passed he was hers, and not he only but his two young
and a fleck of deep color on either cheek, his limbs all rigid as one
wayside auberge there are fit quarters for an honorable company.”

two miles on this side of Villefranche. He is Seneschal of Auvergne, and
length behind them. Alleyne had lingered for an instant in the passage,
with a wooden wine-pitcher upon it and two horn cups. Some way from it
“Has he gone?” quoth he.
would have seen. You would have beheld a spectacle then. There would

Shall I not know him by his great paws and his red head? Ma foi, yes!”
At this moment there was a clatter of hoofs upon the road, and a varlet
you have seen it. For this man was so swollen with pride that he would

CHAPTER XXIX. HOW THE BLESSED HOUR OF SIGHT CAME TO THE LADY TIPHAINE.
by his foes, and yet not loved by those whom he protected, for twice he
countryman. Nor was he less glad to see Sir Nigel, when the Englishman’s
from the kingdom of Bohemia. These with Alleyne and Ford, four French
chair, and her long dark lashes drooped low over her sparkling eyes.
feudal father and liege lord. Yet there is not one of them but hath an

“So I have heard you tell them,” said the lord of the castle; “and for
given them to me, and I tell you here in your own castle hall, Sir
admiration at Du Guesclin. “Did not your heart sink within you? Were you
“If that be sign of sin, then, by Saint Paul! I have much upon my soul,”
What think you that the dog did? Why, in the morning we found that he

and the beads upon his brick-colored brow, it was easy to see that he

“It would be best that he should come,” cried the Hospitaller.
honor to run a small course with him, or debate the matter in whatever
“Among the gifts which have been vouchsafed to my wife,” said Du

save for the sharp breathing of the Lady Tiphaine and for the gentle

me? Mist, mist, rolling mist with a square black tower above it. See it
hounds. But those in the castle fight bravely. There is a woman, two
when hawking upon the second Sunday of Advent, and have never set eyes

“It seems indeed that there are evil times coming upon your country,”
country?” said he. “I fear, lady, that what you have said bodes but
ice. Her banner is scorched in the sun. She lies athwart the lands, and
It was late ere Alleyne Edricson, having carried Sir Nigel the goblet

warning--I saw it, Alleyne, even as I see those two archers upon their
from the couch and left the chamber, while Alleyne could hear his feet
moonshine, with the river curving across the lower end of it.

“I think nothing of it, mon camarade! There are as many masterless folk

persuaded himself that his fears were a foolish fancy, when his eyes
him and a rope round his neck, his poor friend had been cast from
his heart’s blood, it will be no fault of Samkin Aylward of the White
scream of a woman and the rush of many feet. Then came the sharp clink
strange shadows from the tusked or antlered heads which ornamented them.
bare-legged, gaunt, unshaven, with deep-set murderous eyes and wild

the bailey.”
They stamp him under their feet! They tear off his gown and wave it in
“All is lost!” he cried. “The castle is taken and on fire, the seneschal
into the castle,” said he, “and through it some of the Jacks made their
“It is the larger. Once there, we might hold the narrow stair; and at
you, ere you should fall into their hands. Lead on, Godfrey! A new
held them up to the blaze or tore at them ravenously with their teeth.
peasant sentry, who started off at the sight of them, yelling loudly to

opens the keep. I must back for it!” He turned, with some wild intention
beat them back!” The mob of peasants had surged in upon their heels, but
thousand were within or around the walls of the Chateau of Villefranche.
sword-arms,” said Du Guesclin. “Do you stand with me, Nigel, upon the

effort to carry the staircase. Their leaders were a small man, dark in
thud of falling bodies, and the screams of the stricken, made up such
they cannot win their way past us. Shoot straight and hard, archers;
Strange was the scene which met their eyes from this eminence. Beneath
vengeance. A yell of execration and a scream of hideous laughter burst

Whilst the two archers were keeping up a brisk fire upon the mob beneath
do you pluck my sleeve, Alleyne?”
“I will show you,” answered Sir Nigel; “for here is the great box of
destruction which had been caused by the explosion. For forty yards
“What then?” cried those behind him.
come through such peril with their lives. Slowly they made their way
and joyous face. “I thought I heard it ere we went down, and now I hear
Company. Here come two hundred as tight lads as ever twirled a shaft
           The men were bred in England,
“There they come, the hearts of gold!” cried Aylward. “See, they move
there are knocks going there is Sammy in the heart of it. But who are
fire, down which we might slip.”
spare. Another strand, Watkin! Now pull at the end that all may be safe.
a minute a good strong cord was dangling from the only sound side of the

Trastamare.”

The archers had spread themselves over the ruins, but a blast upon a
all spoke of the brave times which they had had as free companions. Each
had learned all that he would know of his men, their doings and their
Jacks who come into his hands, for he is a man of short speech. It
returning comrades there was a shout of welcome, and a horseman, who
strange, thick Gascon speech which turns every _v_ into a _b_. “But you
“But let the men break their fast, and we shall then take counsel what
castle. At Castelnau also there is a cobbler who is in my pay, and who

good wills. In very sooth, my Lord Loring, they are ill men to trifle


“By my hilt! lads,” cried Aylward, jumping upon the fallen trunk, “I


with you. But you shall have such men as will follow you, and you may
peaks, beyond which the banner of England had never yet been seen.
spotless and untrodden peaks, white and dazzling, against the pale blue
And now all was ready for the enterprise. From Dax to St. Jean
Edward, however, had shattered all the schemes and wiles of the plotter.
and that they should remain on guard at the further end until the whole
and I would that the King of Navarre had held it against us, for it
“That is a village named Les Aldudes, and I know a hostel there also
down a long vista of beech woods and jagged rock-strewn wilderness, all
thickly upon our flanks. Pass word to the men, Aylward, that they
spear-runnings have I not seen, and even in an humble way had a part in,
“But surely, my fair lord,” said Alleyne, “you have done some great
lane from my kennels to the Avon.”
By my hilt! our little lord is wroth because we have come peacefully
yonder squadrons which show that the best blood of England is riding
upon the banner of the five roses waving from the hamlet; but his course
three deep upon cream-colored chargers in front of him. On either side
Clarks, the boars’-heads of the Lucies, the crescents of the Boyntons,
Saintonge, of La Rochelle, of Quercy, of Limousin, of Agenois, of
came the turbulent bands of the Bastard of Breteuil, Nandon de Bagerant,

the companies of Ortingo and of La Nuit, leaning upon their unsightly
“And shall again, camarade, I doubt not. But hola! Johnston, who is this
those whom I have known.”
eighteen through his forearm.”
been carried on in that hybrid camp dialect which both nations could
loose as easily as a man.”
of Twynham ale.”
shot or two with this springald?”

his girdle, and fixing it to the windlass, he drew back the powerful
through your gizzard. Now, comrade, I take no flight shot, and I give
and the bird whirled aloft in a last convulsive flutter before falling


stand at the fifth wand to carry back my bolts to me.”

“Which weapon hath the vantage now?” cried the Brabanter, strutting

long shoot from old Hob Miller of Milford.” He took up a great black
bow-stave upon their soles, and his cord twanged with a deep rich hum
“Six hundred and thirty paces! Mon Dieu! but that is a shoot! And yet it
it, and sped it at the same mark.
“My shaft has passed through it, camarade, and I trow the one which goes
towards them, his face shining and his whole small figure swelling with

your banner.”

head, and the two old soldiers rode off together to their pavilion.
of waters, the scream of the eagle, and the howling of wolves the only
Ebro curving betwixt its double line of homesteads and of villages. The

Spaniards ere I turn.”

side we can make good our retreat.”
themselves in a black ravine, with others sloping away from it on either
peasant, “I swear to you that in the darkness I have myself lost the
certes he hath merited a dog’s death.”
the last deep “amen” broken from the Company, when, in an instant, there
brushwood, they looked out upon a scene which made their hearts beat
a huge palace of red and white silk, with the royal arms of Castile
of pages led their masters’ chargers down to water, while the knights
their blood ere I turn my mare’s head for the mountains. Am I a child,
He was about to push recklessly forward into the open, when Sir Nigel
counsel together as to what they should do; while from below there
“By the apple of Eve!” cried the fat knight, “it appears to me that

“And so say I,” cried Felton, heartily. “But I wish the day were over,
way; but Hordle John seized him by the foot in his grasp of iron and
the base hands of a common archer?”

“It shall be duly paid him.”
cloud of dust along the whole eastern sky-line, with the glint of spears
that of the Lord of Antoing and of Briseuil, and of many another from
to the ears of the Englishmen, and they could see the soldiers of the

“Then the rest I leave to your wisdom, Sir William; and if God sends us
for their squires, and there was mad turmoil on every hand of bewildered
emerged once more, their swords and forearms reddened with blood,
hither and thither in aimless fury. The mad turmoil, the mixture of
had a hard fight for it, for there were three of them with their mouths

ever wear his arms, so as to shield him from even such perils as have

sparkling with beads of moisture; yet the camp was loud with laughter
a flat stone which lay across his knees; while beside him sat Alleyne
ready or no, I am about to dip this into it.”

hang up my bow, marry a wife, and take to the fire corner. But how now,
“It is fairly and clearly written,” Alleyne answered, “and it signifies

Socman of Minstead. For when ye had left us, this evil man gathered
“Marked you not how she said that the leader was one with a yellow
“By St. Paul! Edricson,” said the knight coldly, arching his eyebrows,

There is no pass at the further end of the valley, and it is a perilous
all, had been listened to by him when he told him the secret of his
Bucklershard, and had listened to the long waves breaking upon the

“Were we a troop of mountain goats we might do so,” answered Sir William
of the horses grew loud upon the ear. Suddenly from out the sea of mist

the ranks, and fling wide the banners, for our souls are God’s and our
streaming banderoles, while the curvets and gambades of the chargers
with the roses of Loring, and on the left, over three score of Welsh
amid yonder sparkling squadron which heads the main battle. There are
“By Saint James!” said he, “if ye fall this day ye fall by no mean
came swooping swiftly down the valley, while the main body followed more

on the target with such force as to split it from side to side, but Sir
combats with the Moors of Andalusia. So fierce was their meeting that
rolled heavily over upon his side, with the blood gushing from his
Johnston had been engaged in throwing light tufts of grass into the air
Alleyne, standing with his sword drawn amidst the archers, saw a long
of the hill there had sprung up a long wall of struggling horses and
A storm of stones broke suddenly upon the defenders, who, drawn up in
“By Saint Paul!” quoth Sir Nigel, plucking the patch from his eye,
sword.”
the streams which rippled amid the rocks had been frozen by over four
to their children as the “Altura de los Inglesos,” where the men from
thither in the desperate struggle, exchanging savage thrusts one instant
writhing and twisted figures to mark the course which they had taken. At
still fought by his side, stemming with a handful of men the fierce tide

that your shoulder has never felt accolade, nor your heels worn the gold

“I see it.”

It was, indeed, a task which might make the heart of the bravest sink

only his own poor life, but that of the eight-score men above him. Yet
his weight upon his arms, at others finding some small shelf or tuft
from his dress that he was no common man, rushed forward to plunder him,
whirling round, the blood was gushing from his brow, his temple, his
group of huts with wondering faces at the doors, of foaming, clattering

riding swiftly amid the rocks, and being ignorant of their numbers, drew
shadow of a great rock, there crouched seven bowmen, with great John



well-knit figure. A flat velvet cap was drawn forward to keep the glare
esteemed by the whole army as one of the most rising of the soldiers of
or alive, and he had come home now sad-hearted, in the hope of raising

basking in the sun, sat the hermit, with clay-colored face, dull eyes,

lady’s carriage drawn by three horses abreast with a postilion upon
“Now woe worth me!” she cried, “and ill fall on Michael Easover of
“We are indeed fresh from Spain,” quoth Alleyne.

“Her father!” cried the lady, smiling. “Nay; Maude is a good daughter,
forever from the world, and to rest her bruised heart under the broad
this young novice was about to bring them.
two-and-twenty who have ever been taught that the way of nature is the
go in her place. There was much to look after, now that the lands of
road, very large and wide-spread, with a great green bush hung upon a
mes anges, for my heart is warm to be among ye again.”
instant the two men were clinging in each other’s arms, laughing and
to England with a rich cargo to reward them for their toils. All this
For Sir Alleyne Edricson and for his beautiful bride the future had also
but, though a silver shilling was to be the prize of the victory, it has

been mixed up in this extraordinary case, which was the one topic of
way,” said I.
cigar-case.
used rather for the sifting of details than for the acquiring of fresh
“Because I made a blunder, my dear Watson--which is, I am afraid, a more
it to another person, and I can hardly expect your co-operation if I do
sums of money have been laid upon him. It is obvious, therefore, that
children, keeps one maid-servant, and is comfortably off. The country
the maid, Edith Baxter, carried down to the stables his supper, which
“‘Can you tell me where I am?’ he asked. ‘I had almost made up my mind
already opened, and Hunter was seated at the small table inside. She had
“‘So, you’re one of those damned touts!’ cried the lad. ‘I’ll show you
to get through.
had not yet returned. She dressed herself hastily, called the maid, and
a tragedy.
that the same stranger had, while standing at the window, drugged his
“Inspector Gregory, to whom the case has been committed, is an extremely
described upon the evening before, but declared that he had no sinister
facts were familiar to me, I had not sufficiently appreciated their
Fitzroy Simpson, having drugged the lad, and having in some way obtained


train.
“Undoubtedly. He has neither a knife nor any sign of a wound. The
“He says that it was a ten-pound note. One was found in his purse. But
“We have found traces which show that a party of gypsies encamped on
in the disappearance of the favorite. Silas Brown, the trainer, is known
stretched away to the sky-line, broken only by the steeples of
Mr. Holmes?” said Gregory.
see them.”

“Three of them are receipted hay-dealers’ accounts. One of them is a
of a recent horror.
“I never had such a dress, sir,” answered the lady.

upon his hands, he made a careful study of the trampled mud in front of
He took the boots from the bag, and compared the impressions of each of
would come back with me, Inspector,” said he. “There are several points
gold, deepening into rich, ruddy browns where the faded ferns and

taken fifty paces before I heard him give a shout, and saw him waving

We had not to go far. It ended at the paving of asphalt which led up

started violently and flushed to the temples.
ashy pale, beads of perspiration shone upon his brow, and his hands

watching him. Of course you observed the peculiarly square toes in the

Colonel’s manner has been just a trifle cavalier to me. I am inclined
begun so brilliantly was quite incomprehensible to me. Not a word more




beyond the town. His face was grave, and his manner was cold in the
yesterday, but the price has become shorter and shorter, until you can

As I spoke a powerful bay horse swept out from the weighing enclosure
Before they reached us, however, Desborough’s bolt was shot, and the

is he, then?”
glossy neck of the thoroughbred.
companion’s narrative of the events which had occurred at the Dartmoor

his wife, the only two people who could have chosen curried mutton for
For what purpose? For a dishonest one, obviously, or why should he drug
subcutaneously, so as to leave absolutely no trace. A horse so treated
discover not only the method of the crime, but even its motives. As a
dropped his cravat, and Straker had picked it up--with some idea,
the sheep, and I asked a question which, rather to my surprise, showed
you care to smoke a cigar in our rooms, Colonel, I shall be happy to
admirable--but because where he failed it happened too often that no one
were simple to the verge of austerity. Save for the occasional use of

cries, ‘Is that man never goin’ to come?’ Those were his very words,


knocking a little out on his palm. “As he might get an excellent smoke
that. But if I am not mistaken I hear him upon the stair, so we shall
in his easy, genial way. “That tries a man’s nerves more than work, and

good many strange secrets in this room, and that we have had the good
joined. We have not had a difference, not one, in thought or word or

“I am a hop merchant myself, and as I have an income of seven or
wrong. However, she would have it so, and it was done. Well, about six
“‘Oh,’ said she, in her playful way, ‘you said that you were only my

sort of folk they were who had come to live so near us. And as I looked
set and rigid about it which was shockingly unnatural. So disturbed
woman. I determined to say nothing about the former to my wife, for
half-opened eyes fell upon her face, illuminated by the candle-light,
more extraordinary and inexplicable did it appear. I was still puzzling

filled with a thousand venomous doubts and suspicions. What was it that

“‘Ah, Jack,’ she said, ‘I have just been in to see if I can be of any
enter that cottage, and I shall probe the matter to the bottom.’
into that cottage, all is over between us.’

the 3.36, which is my usual train. As I entered the house the maid ran
lane, but I did not stop to speak with them. In the cottage lay the
of my wife, which had been taken at my request only three months ago.

man who is under the influence of extreme emotions. My companion sat


If you have reason to believe that it is inhabited, do not force your
“It had an ugly sound,” I answered.

pounds, and endeavors to buy them off. They come in spite of it, and
it is still so when he reconnoitres it this evening. What do you think

“You are quite determined to do this, in spite of your wife’s warning
“There are the lights of my house,” he murmured, pointing to a glimmer
entreaty.
the table and two upon the mantelpiece. In the corner, stooping over a
“I will tell you the meaning of it,” cried the lady, sweeping into

to tell you. I had to choose between you, and in my weakness I turned


little over-confident in my powers, or giving less pains to a case
others must himself be whole, and looks askance at the curative powers




a few weeks. The soles which you are at this moment presenting to me are

“Just the same as mine. Both have been ever since the houses were
which made him look what he was--a smart young City man, of the class
may prove to have nothing, but which, at least, presents those unusual
as no doubt you remember, and came a nasty cropper. I had been with them
The advertisement was to be answered by letter only. I sent in my
what he wanted with me; but, of course, I asked her to show him up. In
“‘Quite so.’
work?’ he asked.
“‘And British Broken Hills?’
enough when measured by your ability, but when compared with Mawson’s,
“This took my breath away. ‘I never heard of it,’ said I.

can do business you may just slip it into your pocket as an advance upon
“‘Not at all, my boy. You have only got your deserts. There are one or
Mawson’s manager. I had gone up to ask him about you, and he was very
write if you would rather I didn’t.’
been given me.
“‘Yes,’ said I.
I stared rather straight at the two deal chairs and one little table,

greatest use to me to have them.’
settled down to my task. All Sunday I was kept hard at work, and yet by

laughed at my not going to Mawson’s, I happened to notice that his tooth
back with me to Birmingham.”
“Oh, easily enough,” said Hall Pycroft, cheerily. “You are two friends
only comes there to see me, apparently, for the place is deserted up to
into which he has gone. Come with me, and I’ll fix it up as easily as
of his employer.
“Yes, I have no doubt that we shall be able to do something for you.
asunder. Holmes and I glanced at each other, and Hall Pycroft took a
“Impossible,” answered Pycroft.
understand in this manner. If ever a man was three parts mad with

round his neck, was hanging the managing director of the Franco-Midland
shivering of his eyelids, which showed a thin white slit of ball
“It’s a blessed mystery to me,” cried Pycroft, scratching his head.

“And why?”
turned up in your place who wrote a completely different hand from that

do.”
of the room and hang himself.”

only recently emerged from a five years’ spell of penal servitude. By
examining the premises the body of the unfortunate watchman was found
and murderer can inspire such affection that his brother turns to
message which struck Justice of the Peace Trevor dead with horror when

before in a communicative humor. Now he sat forward in this arm-chair
I was laid by the heels for ten days, but Trevor used to come in to
shooting in the fens, remarkably good fishing, a small but select
kindness and charity on the country-side, and was noted for the leniency
twelvemonth.’
“‘Anything else?’ he asked, smiling.

nutshells which strewed the cloth, in a dead faint.
with which he prefaced it, was, if you will believe me, Watson, the very
from their blurred appearance, and from the staining of the skin round
to show it, I am sure, but it was so strongly in his mind that it peeped
“‘What does he want, then?’
brandy as he passed me.

with the man when he was going back to the diggings, and then, leaving
“He met me with the dog-cart at the station, and I saw at a glance that

since--not one. The governor has never held up his head from that
chimneys and the flag-staff which marked the squire’s dwelling.
“‘Well, matters went from bad to worse with us, and this animal Hudson
in the study all day, where I could see through the window that he was

“‘And how?’ I asked eagerly.
“‘Nothing. There lies the inexplicable part of it. The message was

from Hudson, the seaman, saying that he had betrayed the guilty secret
for fly-paper and for preservation of your hen-pheasant’s life.’

if we had no other means of discovering the sender. You see that he has
men.’
this way:
to never give one thought to it again.
harshly of me, laddie. It was a debt of honor, so called, which I had
had been in the Chinese tea-trade, but she was an old-fashioned,
shoulder, and I am sure that he could not have measured less than six

“‘“I’d had nearly a quarter of a million, hadn’t I?”
Now, you don’t think it likely that a man who could do anything is going
barrel. He’s got the dibbs, he has, and where do you think he is at this

to us.
“‘One evening, about the third week after our start, the doctor had come
table, while the chaplain stood with a smoking pistol in his hand at
were so cowed by the sight that I think we should have given the job up
“‘It was over them that the great quarrel arose. There were many of us
mariners whose ship had foundered in Lat. 15 degrees and Long 25 degrees
starboard quarter. Suddenly as we looked at her we saw a dense black
name of Hudson, who was so burned and exhausted that he could give us no
An instant later the explosion occurred, though Hudson thought it was
We prospered, we traveled, we came back as rich colonials to England,
“That was the narrative which I read that night to young Trevor, and I
they are very heartily at your service.”
Bohemianism of disposition, has made me rather more lax than befits a
the butter-dish or in even less desirable places. But his papers were
not deny the justice of my request, so with a rather rueful face he went
had come to glorify me.” He lifted bundle after bundle in a tender,
“Well, my boy, what do you make of this lot?” he asked, smiling at my
of the table. Then he reseated himself in his chair and looked them over
certainly be incomplete which contained no account of this very singular
“When I first came up to London I had rooms in Montague Street, just
as pride was really an attempt to cover extreme natural diffidence.
into my room in Montague Street. He had changed little, was dressed like
“‘I am delighted to hear it, for your advice at present would be

his personal advantages and his extraordinary gifts--for he can speak
of an excitable Welsh temperament--had a sharp touch of brain-fever,
struggling against it until two in the morning, I felt that it was quite
the open door.
with fear, and he thrust into his breast the chart-like paper which he
charges, but of no practical use whatever.’
that, Mr. Musgrave, but not to be cast out before all the folk that I
“‘He crept away, his face sunk upon his breast, like a broken man, while

shriek of laughter, while I, horrified at this sudden hysterical attack,
we ransacked every room and cellar without discovering the least sign
It was not difficult to tell the direction which she had taken, for,
their wits’ end, and I have come up to you as a last resource.’
thought it worth his while to consult, even at the risk of the loss of

“‘North by ten and by ten, east by five and by five, south by two and by
“‘At least,’ said I, ‘it gives us another mystery, and one which is even
“‘He simply wished, I should imagine, to refresh his memory upon that
confine my account of it to saying that it is built in the shape of
lead me to the truth concerning both the butler Brunton and the maid
magnificent trees that I have ever seen.
“‘Oh, yes.’
“‘I can give you it at once. It was sixty-four feet.’
tree some months ago, in connection with some little argument with the
“Well, at least I knew that if Brunton could do it, I could also.
depression in the ground. I knew that it was the mark made by Brunton in
were firmly cemented together, and had certainly not been moved for many
“We went down a winding stone stair, and my companion, striking a match,
present, and I then endeavored to raise the stone by pulling on the
“At the moment, however, we had no thought for the old chest, for our
investigation. I had reckoned upon solving the matter when once I had
something valuable was concealed. He had spotted the place. He found
raising of that stone. A burly Sussex policeman and I had found it no
Clearly, only one could fit into the hole, and that one was Brunton. The
drumming of frenzied hands against the slab of stone which was choking
which had been in the box; ‘you see we were right in fixing our date for
shape.
curiosity.’
“‘And how came it in the pond?’
it came within reach of a man who tore its secret out of it and lost his
Adventure VI. The Reigate Puzzle
lying ill in the Hotel Dulong. Within twenty-four hours I was in his
Three days later we were back in Baker Street together; but it was
On the evening of our arrival we were sitting in the Colonel’s gun-room
“None as yet. But the affair is a petty one, one of our little country
“What an extraordinary assortment!” I exclaimed.
the Colonel, and the talk drifted away into less dangerous channels.
The Colonel whistled. “By Jove!” said he. “Who’s killed, then? The J.P.

their operations, and not to crack two cribs in the same district within
both hands.”

quarter to twelve when the alarm broke out. Mr. Cunningham had just got

He took a small piece of torn paper from a note-book and spread it out
          maybe
there being an understanding between the burglar and the servant, and
An hour and half had elapsed before the Inspector returned alone.
“I don’t think you need alarm yourself,” said I. “I have usually found

garden-hedge in his flight. That was of great interest.”
“It should give a clue, Mr. Holmes.”

lodge, and if you will come up, Colonel, I will show you the scene of
very hard, you see, and there are no marks to guide us.” As he spoke two
“There’s only one,” answered the Inspector. “We thought that if we could

“Where was he sitting?”
when he could see from the lights that two of the family were still
string, a letter-weight, and I don’t know what other odds and ends.”

“Get it printed as soon as possible,” he said; “I think your idea is an

“It is singular that on this particular night he should have been up.
very unnecessary. That is my room at the end of the stairs, and my
“I hope that you are satisfied now?” said Mr. Cunningham, tartly.
rolled about into every corner of the room.
his head, in my opinion. Come with me, father, and see where he has got
two Cunninghams were bending over the prostrate figure of Sherlock
“Tut, man, look at their faces!” cried Holmes, curtly.

at luncheon time.”
working. I confess that they quite surpass my expectations, and that I
showing you the various points which guided me in my decision. Pray
it must have been Alec Cunningham himself, for by the time that the old

equal hand in it. Now, of the two men, it is clear that the one who
“Excellent!” cried Mr. Acton.

wound upon the dead man was, as I was able to determine with absolute
the Cunninghams. Of course, it instantly occurred to me that they had
was still obscure. What I wanted above all was to get the missing part
“Good heavens!” cried the Colonel, laughing, “do you mean to say all our
Holmes, laughing. “I was sorry to cause you the sympathetic pain which
ready to blow out his own or anybody else’s brains if he could have got

delighted with the traces of heredity shown in the p’s and in the tails
sound of the locking of the hall door some time before told me that the
“You look surprised, and no wonder! Relieved, too, I fancy! Hum! You
the British workman in the house. He’s a token of evil. Not the drains,
glancing very keenly across at me.
“Elementary,” said he. “It is one of those instances where the reasoner
“The problem presents features of interest,” said he. “I may even say


has always, I understand, been as popular with the ladies of the
follow.
peculiarity took the form of a dislike to being left alone, especially
last Monday.”
“There is a room which is used as a morning-room at Lachine. This faces
knocked without receiving any answer, and even turned the handle, but
unable, however, to make his way in, and the maids were too distracted
again, therefore, through the window, and having obtained the help of
in the house it is possible that it may have been overlooked. Nothing
succeeded in eliciting the facts which I have already stated. One other
dreadful expression of fear and horror which a human countenance is
“Having gathered these facts, Watson, I smoked several pipes over them,
impressions of his foot-marks: one in the roadway itself, at the point
animal. It had five well-marked foot-pads, an indication of long nails,
with. I have tried to reconstruct it from the measurements. Here are
window, and its aim seems to have been to get at the bird.”
possible, that the Colonel fell down from sheer fright at the sight of

between this young lady and the old soldier, which the former had now
capital charge unless the matter were cleared up.
o’clock. On our way we had to pass through Hudson Street, which is

were at the door here, when she took me by the hand and begged me to
Barclay. If he were still in Aldershot it should not be a very difficult
two nights she had heard him groaning and weeping in his bedroom. He
“Most certainly--but in the presence of a witness.”
It was midday when we found ourselves at the scene of the tragedy, and,
“Good, Simpson!” said Holmes, patting him on the head. “Come along,
“What should I know about that?”

“It was a just providence that killed him. But, mind you this, that if
you look at this poor thing huddled before the fire, and hear me say
we could not hope to fight our way out with all the women and children,
I heard enough to tell me that my comrade, the very man who had arranged
where I lived mostly among the natives and picked up a living by the



“But if not, there is no object in raking up this scandal against a
that death was due to apoplexy. You see it was quite a simple case after

have experienced in picking out examples which shall in every way answer
and yet the whole train of circumstances is so remarkable that I cannot
Nature found no place among his many gifts, and his only change was
“What is this, Holmes?” I cried. “This is beyond anything which I could
eyebrows. So when I saw you throw down your paper and enter upon a train
“Do you mean to say that you read my train of thoughts from my
the wall, and of course your meaning was obvious. You were thinking
it that I knew you could not think of Beecher without thinking of that
that I am as amazed as before.”
“Hum! A doctor’s--general practitioner, I perceive,” said Holmes. “Not
and thirty, but his haggard expression and unhealthy hue told of a life
“My name is Doctor Percy Trevelyan,” said our visitor, “and I live at
“My own hobby has always been nervous disease. I should wish to make it
and the recent turn which it has taken is so elaborate, that I shall
me.


frank with you, and if it suits you it will suit me very well. I have a
“This was the strange proposal, Mr. Holmes, with which the man
speculation. From the first it was a success. A few good cases and the
walk which had usually been the prelude to his dinner. From his manner
call at about quarter past six to-morrow evening, if Dr. Trevelyan will

“To this, of course, I assented, and the young man withdrew. The patient
I had obtained good results in such cases by the inhalation of nitrite


“I have told you that Mr. Blessington generally chose this hour of the
“‘D’you mean to say those are mine?’ he cried.
for certainly the incident is a very singular one, though he appears to
associates with a West-End practice. A small page admitted us, and we
We were conscious of a long scrutiny out of the darkness.
to you for coming round. No one ever needed your advice more than I do.
He led the way into his bedroom, which was large and comfortably

“I can make little of it,” I confessed.
“And then?”

doctor’s, you will acknowledge that there can be no doubt as to his
“Any fresh news?”
“Blessington has committed suicide!”
entered, about seven, there the unfortunate fellow was hanging in the
until he was scarce human in his appearance. The neck was drawn out

have smoked heavily during the night, too. Here are four cigar-ends that
are usually wrapped in straw, you know, and are thinner for their length


“That must have saved them trouble,” said Holmes, thoughtfully. “Yes,
only recently come into your service, Doctor.”
footmarks. I had the advantage of learning which was which last night.
these cigars were smoked. The older man sat in that wicker chair; it
night’s doings, which Holmes had deduced from signs so subtle and minute

“Precisely,” said Holmes.
Sutton, who was the worst of the gang, turned informer. On his evidence

upon the Portuguese coast, some leagues to the north of Oporto. The
regarding him as an isolated phenomenon, a brain without a heart, as
“In your own case,” said I, “from all that you have told me, it seems
powers in England, how was it that neither police nor public had heard

I shall be very happy to introduce you to two curiosities.”
trouble to prove himself right. Again and again I have taken a problem

St. James’s end. Sherlock Holmes stopped at a door some little distance

the spot,” said Mycroft. “Look at the magnificent types! Look at these

“Surely,” answered Holmes, “it is not hard to say that a man with that
probably died in childbed. The fact that he has a picture-book under his
“My dear Mycroft, I should be delighted.”
face and coal-black hair proclaimed his Southern origin, though his
an interpreter, as perhaps my neighbor there has told you. I interpret
great hurry, bustling me rapidly into the cab when we had descended to
upon the seat beside him. Having done this, he drew up the windows on
must be aware that what you are doing is quite illegal.’
“For nearly two hours we drove without my having the least clue as to

fashion, and with little giggling laughs in between, but somehow he
high white marble mantel-piece, and what seemed to be a suit of Japanese
then, give him the pencil. You are to ask the questions, Mr. Melas, and
“‘You know what awaits you, then?’
“‘I care not. I am a stranger in London.’

stay away longer. It is so lonely up there with only--Oh, my God, it is
“‘That will do, Mr. Melas,’ said he. ‘You perceive that we have taken
insignificant-looking man inspired me. I could see him better now as the
closely at my heels, and took his place opposite to me without a word.

“So that was the end of my adventure, Mr. Holmes. I do not know where I
English, will be rewarded. A similar reward paid to any one giving
know, and Mr. Melas also. In the meantime, Mr. Melas, I should certainly
“Well, knowing as much as we do, it will be singular indeed if we fail
Sherlock Holmes shook his head. “This young man could not talk a word of
and they pitch upon this Mr. Melas, having used some other one before.
relations with the girl--some weeks, at any rate--since the brother in

“Here it is,” said he, “written with a J pen on royal cream paper by a
“Better pick up Mr. Melas on our way,” I suggested. “We may need an
know that he drove away with the gentleman in a carriage.”
aware from their experience the other night. This villain was able to
“The windows are all dark,” remarked the inspector. “The house seems
say for a certainty that there was a very considerable weight on the
circumstances we may enter without an invitation.”
great bulk would permit.
which set us gasping and coughing. Holmes rushed to the top of the
the marks of a violent blow. The other, who was secured in a similar
giggling ruffian had produced upon the unfortunate linguist, for he
family, and that she had been on a visit to some friends in England.
of the interpreter’s visit, she had seen him for the first time. The
find the Grecian girl, one might learn how the wrongs of herself and her
importance and implicates so many of the first families in the kingdom
Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he was two

minute seems an hour while I live in this state of horrible suspense.
of course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was ever

attention.
“No, a woman’s, and a woman of rare character. You see, at the
that he still conveyed the impression of a plump and mischievous boy.
name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a
cordially. “I should never have known you under that moustache, and I

regret to say, some rumors have already got into the public press. It is
“I took the papers and--”
“And speaking low?”
importance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in what
little lodge at the foot of the stairs, and is in the habit of making
staircase, with the commissionnaire’s lodge in the passage at the
bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with a start.

other way.”
distinctly remember that as we did so there came three chimes from a
‘only one person has passed during that time--a woman, tall and elderly,

street. Well, if you won’t, I will.’ And with that he rushed off in the
had passed.
The charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the


which had been given to us. A young woman opened the door, who proved to

whether she might have made away with the papers during the instant that
was the victim of an extraordinary accident? No allowance is made
what had happened, and his story did not mend matters. It was evident to
in the office that night. His remaining behind and his French name were
“You statement has been so explicit,” said he at last, “that you have


goodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All other

“What!”
“God bless you for promising to come,” cried our client. “It gives me
Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon
“Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundreds of
got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came down to
this matter together. I think that we should begin by seeing Forbes.
a position where he was not sorry to have such a document accidentally
pencil: “L10 reward. The number of the cab which dropped a fare at or

errand upon which we had come.

“Yes, but they were paid off.”
attracted the attention of the police constable.”
leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about Charles Street?”

instantly shown up. The statesman received us with that old-fashioned
it the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. I fear that the

else knew anything of the matter, then the thief’s presence in the room
“Not yet.”


together. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no
Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or two trains of
“Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might
“You must know that last night was the very first night that I have ever
creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could stand it no
roused the others. Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed outside
“You have certainly had your share,” said Holmes. “Do you think you
his shoulders.
“Have you ever had an alarm like this before?”
The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the wooden
the open window of the bedroom long before the others came up.
“And am I to remain here?”
main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you would come up
“Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find the
for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing us into

thief.”

anything yet without a very good reason,” and with that our conversation

“He has said nothing.”
theories, each of which was more impossible than the last. Why had
the door and our friend got out of it. Standing in the window we saw

miles of Surrey air this morning. I suppose that there has been no

Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of blue-gray paper.
just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to blunder
through some admirable Surrey scenery to a pretty little village called
I crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawled from one
outside and take the key with her when she went to bed. She carried out
opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison stepped out into the moonlight.”
square piece of board, such as is usually left to enable plumbers to get
if, as I shrewdly suspect, he finds the nest empty before he gets there,
have heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavily in
begun to suspect Joseph, from the fact that you had intended to travel
and knowing his way he walked straight into your room the instant after
bundled out of his room, and from that time onward there were always at
I have described. I already knew that the papers were probably in the
“It may be so,” answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. “I can only
first brought us together at the period of the “Study in Scarlet,” up
the last is, as I shall now show, an absolute perversion of the facts.
I saw him walk into my consulting-room upon the evening of April 24th.
“Of what?”



walking the streets of London unchallenged.”
set up as an army coach. So much is known to the world, but what I am


slip out of our hands even at the last moment.
“My nerves are fairly proof, Watson, but I must confess to a start when
“The fact is that upon his entrance I had instantly recognized the

through your continual persecution that I am in positive danger of
and I say, unaffectedly, that it would be a grief to me to be forced
“He rose also and looked at me in silence, shaking his head sadly.
“‘I can promise you the one, but not the other,’ he snarled, and so
Oxford Street. As I passed the corner which leads from Bentinck Street
connection will ever be traced between the gentleman upon whose front
laid, and all will be well. Matters have gone so far now that they can
beg, my dear Watson, that you will obey them to the letter, for you are

Street, and immediately whistling for a hansom, in which I heard him
 My only source of anxiety now was the non-appearance of Holmes. The


“You haven’t’ seen about Baker Street, then?”


“But it must be late.”

and pointed up the line.
“And what would he have done had he overtaken us?”


ourselves clear of the danger which was dogging our footsteps.
be assured that society was freed from Professor Moriarty he would
tell. It is not a subject on which I would willingly dwell, and yet I am
smoke from a burning house. The shaft into which the river hurls itself
very few minutes of our leaving, an English lady had arrived who was in
little time at the fall, he said, and would then walk slowly over the
It may have been a little over an hour before I reached Meiringen. Old
But I waited for none of the landlord’s explanations. In a tingle of

the gleam of the broken water. I shouted; but only the same half-human
of Mr. Moriarty, who awaits my convenience for the final discussion of
and inscribed “Moriarty.” I made every disposition of my property before
most dangerous criminal and the foremost champion of the law of their

revised and all fresh available knowledge has been added within the
Barnes, Maxwell, Pearce, Hamilton, and others. Especially I would
of those inflexible French Huguenots who gave up home and fortune and
never treated us so roughly as these hard-bitten farmers with their
repelled by the evil weather, and lured forwards by rumours of gold,
which make for empire. It is the men from the bleak and barren lands who
splendid seed. France has not founded other countries, like her great
founding little towns here and there, such as Graaf-Reinet and
by two rights, the right of conquest and the right of purchase. In 1806
should hold something very good for us in that land, for if we merely
extended beyond the settlements? Or were the discontented Dutch at
They were slaveholders, and the slaves were about as numerous as
view of the rights of the native and the claim which he has to the
The British Government in South Africa has always played the unpopular
the beam was actually brought from a farmhouse at Cookhouse Drift to
was willing to pay for what he thought was right. It was a noble
wisdom when the half-told story comes to be finished.
were loaded up, the huge teams were inspanned, the women were seated
it untenanted, save by the dwarf bushmen, the hideous aborigines,
Boers combined the use of their horses and of their rifles so cleverly
defeated Dingaan, the great Chief of the Zulus. Being unable, owing to
had settled at Port Natal, now known as Durban. The home Government,
people. The blundering headstrong attack, the defeat, the powerlessness
conquered, and to return to the bare pastures of the upland veld. They
the Kaffirs and their fear and dislike of the British Government appear
settled order of civilised rule.

may have against Great Britain, we can at least, save perhaps in one
representatives into power and run the government upon Dutch lines.
For twenty-five years after the Sand River Convention the burghers
But certainly a formidable invasion was pending, and the scattered
Government. A memorial against the measure received the signatures of a
stupidity. If the Transvaalers had waited they would have had their
had every interest in preserving them.
through the country small detachments were surrounded and besieged
victory they would now be hardly remembered. It is the fact that they
Gladstonian Government, an act which was either the most pusillanimous
war for the sake of a military revenge. It was the height of idealism,
and included under the heading of ‘Colonies’ in the news columns of the
themselves through the action of the home Government converted into
their feelings to their neighbours. Can it be wondered at that South

purpose of turning these freebooters out of the country. It may be
more clumsy Convention of London. The changes in the provisions were all
also the independence, of the Transvaal was proclaimed in that preamble,
This, then, is a synopsis of what had occurred up to the signing of
bare slopes of the Witwatersrand veld--these are the lids which cover

England. As time went on, however, the German and French interests
That would be a fair parallel to the relations between the Transvaal,
when he endeavoured to win the franchise by which he might peaceably
grown in 1899 to four million pounds, and the country through the
to pay 40 pounds per head to the entire male Boer population.
6. Despotic government in the matter of the press and of the right of
some petty, which ramified through every transaction of life.

As the mines increased in importance and the miners in numbers, it
knew that Great Britain claimed to be the paramount power in South
a majority of the votes, it was only a question of time before the
theory, it is unjust and impossible in practice.
same right may be justly invoked to reverse so intolerable a situation.
by his taxation must surely be an injustice.
has been a good friend to the empire.
external interference.
population of the country. A small liberal body in the Raad supported
the member already quoted, who challenged the Uitlanders to come out and
and though the State of which he was the head depended for its revenue
had been flung back at them, it was natural that their eyes should
never yet, in spite of two commissions of investigation, been properly
matters by asking for outside help. Mr. Cecil Rhodes was Premier of the
taken in hand. Five hundred policemen and three field guns made up the
When it became confirmed they rose, but in a halfhearted fashion
the detectives and armed burghers occupied the town, and sixty of their
to the enormous importation of arms and obvious preparations for war?
the exact bearings of the question, and it was obvious that as Dutch
of high treason. Mr. Lionel Phillips, Colonel Rhodes (brother of Mr.
Great Britain for 1,677, 938 pounds 3 shillings and 3 pence--the greater
the reformers was chosen to fill the vacancy, and the protection of a
the only outcome of the affair. No amelioration came to the newcomers.
or acknowledge that their protection was beyond her power. A direct
whole great peninsula. Our foreign critics, with their misapprehension
worst she had an immense deal to lose. There was no room for ambition or
majority of the resident males of full age the full vote, and he will
imagine how a state of unrest and insecurity, to say nothing of a
for the South African Republic, and Mr. Chamberlain, Colonial Secretary,
to trustworthy arbitration.
this independence. What was essential to one was inadmissible to the
reviewed the situation. ‘The principle of equality of races was,’ he
the position was, and how essential it was that an earnest national
undermine the influence and reputation of Great Britain within the

anxious to see extended to the Transvaal. ‘Only treat our folk as we
important change in the proposals of President Kruger, coupled with
and of the civilised world.’
Bill valueless. Since it was carefully retained, it was certainly meant
submitted to the Raad upon August 7th, with the addition that when
condition of things has never been known, and that no previous precedent
‘Mining Machinery,’ arrived from Germany and France, to find their
speech which is as unusual as it is welcome in diplomacy, that the
not like the laws of the Medes and the Persians. They are mortal, they
her position as suzerain power. Mr. Chamberlain’s dispatch ended by
against contingencies. The roar of the fall was sounding loud and near.
‘Acceptance of these terms by the South African Republic would at once
the situation de novo, and to formulate their own proposals for a final

It is curious in turning over the files of such a paper as the ‘Times’
very serious phase, after the failure of the Bloemfontein conference and
force, condemned to act upon the defensive, could have been masked and
citizens of both the British colonies. Many sinister signs were observed
informed by the General Officer Commanding, Natal, that he will not have
least, have trekked, at great loss to themselves; their sheep are
demoralising effect on the natives and on the loyal Europeans in the
5th Dragoon Guards, 9th Lancers, and 19th Hussars came from India, with
it arose from our defective intelligence, or from that caste feeling
positions as Ladysmith or Dundee, the danger, though not so imminent,
junction, so that the position could not be evacuated without a
dispatch of the Cabinet message of September 8th, the military situation
a dispute, was going, in a way which some would call wanton and some
British Intelligence Department was not far wrong. According to this
task lay before the soldiers of the empire. When we turn from such an
preparations were long antecedent to the raid. The building of the forts
commonwealth, extending from Cape Town to the Zambesi, in which flag,
subsidised also, and considerable sums spent upon the press in France
formerly a member of the Cape Legislative Council and a very prominent
get me to become a member of his Afrikander Bond, but, after studying
from South Africa.
be on the side of England, because He must view with abhorrence any
expectation.’
that is accomplished, South Africa will be great.’
which have been used to cover the issue. Let those who talk about
to Pretoria, which stated the minimum terms which the British Government
hearts’ blood also in time of war? Had we really founded a series of
spirit of the north, was the last to speak, but spoke the more firmly
have advocated such self denial had their own countries been placed in
for a final settlement.’ The reply had been both negative and
alliance had been concluded between the two States, which must, until

neutrality and to prevent military intervention by any of its citizens.
from over both borders, came the news of martial preparations. Already
regard it as such, and continued to draw up their final state paper. The
refer the quarrel to the same dread Judge.
which were evidently pending.
leave South Africa, and that those who were now upon the sea should be

sketch where we have erred in the past in South Africa. On our hands,
country? The one means freedom for a single race, the other means equal

in the campaign, and the whole empire will endorse them to-day. Could we
perhaps more properly an Irish-American-corps of the same number, who
calumnies and some few unpleasant truths, they might compare with most
eyes and a grim mouth half hidden by his bushy beard, he was a fine type
been something between twenty and thirty thousand men. By all accounts
the important collieries of that district. The positions chosen seem in
1st Gloucesters, the 2nd King’s Royal Rifles, and the 2nd Rifle Brigade,
Then what was there between them and the sea? Some detachments of local
invasion. At the same date news reached the British headquarters of
Landmans and Vants Drifts was fired into by the Doornberg commando, and
glass towards the same place. And then the men could see also, and a
was the hillside and there the enemy. So at it again with the good old
that the Boer percussion-shells were useless in soft ground, as hardly
withered veld. There were few casualties until the wood was reached,
the hill? Have they got the hill?’ was his one eternal question as they
bounded by a rough stone wall built for herding cattle. A second wall
won.
here, between the wall and the summit, that Colonel Gunning, of the
killed and 180 wounded, but among the killed were many whom the army
in command appears to have thought that an armistice had been declared,
Suffice it for the civilian to chronicle the fact, and leave it to the
to the army, and a series of defensive positions were held to cover
rest upon the survivors for their decision to surrender, though the
it through. The force was in a position so radically false that the only
direction of Glencoe Station, but the passes were found to be strongly
mainly to the skillful guidance of Colonel Dartnell, of the Natal
sufferings and such endurance that others in other days are nerved to do
A small body of horsemen were the forerunners of a considerable
of the Imperial Horse, and, in the train which slowly accompanied his
fighting their way back to them again. A most unmerited slur had been
force came in contact with a few scattered Boer outposts, who retired,
and the thud as it buried itself in the ground under a limber. Such
sympathetic ear of Ladysmith. He did not whisper in vain. What he had
It was late after noon before the advance began. It was hard, among
White’s chivalrous spirit that within ten days he refused to identify
thudding of their feet and the rattle of their sidearms filling the air
the main attack from the left flank was carried out by the Gordons,
that the advancing infantry alternately dipped into shelter and emerged
pause, and then with a fresh impulse the wave of men gathered themselves

out again, unmistakable in its urgency. With the instinct of discipline
dashed up to the enemy’s position, and the action may indeed be said to

the fatigue parties were searching the hillside and the wounded were
intended to come in a circuitous fashion by road. White’s problem was
with the 10th mountain battery, four infantry regiments, the Devons,
afternoon. A well-directed fire of the Boer guns from the hills was
Boers, but they were probably slight. On our side we lost 109 killed and
tactical advantages lay with us. We had twice driven them from their
some mounted infantry, and the Imperial Light Horse. Among his infantry
Rietfontein were forced upon him in order to disengage his compromised
him. Joubert with his main body was moving across from Dundee. The
bands were united he must do so at once. The wounded were sent down to
his object was to protect his left wing against those Freestaters who
the command of Colonel Carleton of the Fusiliers (one of three gallant
from the town. Here they had two forty-pounders and three other lighter
as difficult to describe as it must have been to direct. The Boer
distances which were unattainable by our fifteen-pounders, enveloped our
attack, for with so huge a position in front of them, and so many hills
which they had held for five hours. The reason for this withdrawal was
had straggled over the ridge, the covering guns whirled and bounded
wafted over five miles of broken country, was the only message which

heard a crash which was louder and sharper than that of their field
advancing from the direction of Dundee, Sir George White throughout the

would be relieved. So they would if White had won his action. But--
The road was irregular and the night was moonless. On either side the
horses galloping, the loose stones flying around them. In the dim light
as if a regiment of dragoons had ridden over them. When the cyclone had
situation rather than to abandon his enterprise. His prudence, did he

mules. The Boers were thick around them, and they could not send a
detachment of Boers, firing from a range of nearly one thousand yards,
Nicholson’s Nek, not that of Laffan’s Plain, which has to be learned in
as the opportunity served, but to leave the hill was certainly to court
the reputation of the British army, and for the sake of an example
altogether. Whether this hoisting of the flag necessarily compromised
devotion!
for generations remain as the most precious ornaments of some colonial
of the Boer army was such as to seriously alarm the public at home,
by the sympathy of her friends in the United States, and by the good
hopes for the safety of Natal and the honour of the Empire. In Cape
chapter of its own. The other was the investment of Kimberley by a force
a body of Kimberley Light Horse, and a battery of light seven-pounder
British Bechuanaland was formally annexed to the South African Republic.
and De Aar, which are sixty miles apart, there were the 9th Lancers, the
abandoned by our small detachments, who concentrated at De Aar. The
A deadly fire crackled suddenly out from among the boulders. Of six
General Methuen had had some previous South African experience when in
Extreme mobility was aimed at in the column, and neither tents nor
difficult one to carry, while it could not be left behind us as a menace


waved by the defenders, on which the British left cover, only to be met
whom the soldiers regarded with the utmost interest. They were a sullen
The remainder of the 23rd was spent at Belmont Camp, and next morning
been made theoretically untenable have again and again been found to
reserve on account of their exertions at Belmont. The Northumberlands,
gallant officers, some of them little boy-middies, cheering them on.
drawn. With such men under the white ensign we leave our island homes in
been hurled against our War Office--a department which in some matters
upon our right flank reported the approach of a considerable body of
protection against the sun by day nor against the cold at night. Water
leader who played upon the western side of the seat of war the same part
was afterwards disowned by his own government. In the succeeding years
of our leaders, that when it was known that Modder River wound over a
Methuen.] On the morning of Tuesday, November 28th, the British troops
windows looking out upon a smiling garden; but death lurked at the
so that they could only retreat under the rifles of their inexorable
cross higher up where there were no such formidable obstacles?’ The
Brigade under Pole-Carew on the left, including the newly arrived Argyll
the rattle of Mauser fire, found a new terror in the malignant
The cavalry was useless, the infantry was powerless--there only remained
marched thirty-two miles in eight hours, and now, hearing the crash
with what care the details of the war had been pre-arranged by the Boer
The guns could not advance, and, indeed, it was found necessary to
overhead.
while reinforcements dribbled across to them from the farther side.
in his official despatch. One cannot read the account of the operations
General turned themselves to their grim task once more, they found a
differentiate the fight at Modder River from any of the hundred actions
march of the 62nd Battery, and artillerymen will note the use of
River could not have been far inferior to our own, and that it arose
that the enemy were seriously demoralised, the General would no doubt
districts of the Orange Free State. Any serious danger to the railway
Reinforcements were now reaching the Modder River force, which made it
and De la Rey were entrenching a most formidable position in front of
pieces searched every cleft and hollow with their shrapnel. No answer
not forgotten you. It may be days, or it may be weeks, but rest assured
scouts, led them on their difficult way.
have argued from their own formation that they could not be near the
lantern by a Boer scout, or the tripping of a soldier over wire, or the
only utterance which a brother Highlander ascribes to him. Men went
the darkness in the wire defences, and were found in the morning hung up
Within half an hour with the break of day the Highland regiments had
come to the aid of the distressed. The sun was hardly up before the
hardly any guide to our artillery fire. Yet it is to the artillery fire
as there were some indications of an attack upon our right flank, the
use of his men, and for the gallantry with which he threw both himself
and water under a burning sun all day. They fell back rapidly for a
the poor tired fellows, the backs of their legs so flayed and blistered
Boer position, and to abandon it was to give up the game altogether.
last attempt to retrieve the day was abandoned. The Highlanders were

it may be doubted if any single battle has ever put so many families of
In his comments upon the battle next day Lord Methuen was said to have

badly compromised, it will be so punished that a quick surrender will be
soften a disaster, and hold out a brighter promise for the future. The
than the brave surgeons and ambulance bearers, who encounter all the
of war attempted to advance to the relief of Kimberley. The distance
In a future chapter it will be recorded how the Army Corps arriving from
a leisurely fashion sauntered over the frontier, arrangements had been
one which operated on the Colesberg line--which was the more vital
criticised, notably during the Soudan campaign, for having called upon
Sterkstroom, while the Boers occupied the very strong position of
of dissimulation. They did the obvious, and usually allowed it to be
well under 3000 men. About three in the afternoon the men were entrained
The men were dog-tired, a long day’s work had been followed by a long
crash of musketry, told that we were to have one more rough lesson of
for cover from the hot fire which came from inaccessible marksmen above
gauntlet of the enemy’s fire as they emerged from the boulders on to
the enemy’s contractors been as trustworthy as their gunners in this
sleeplessness had taken all fire and spirit out of the men. They dropped
a word unnecessarily to aggravate the pain of that brave man who, having
of such a plan more difficult. The idea of a swift sudden attack upon
This defeat of General Gatacre’s, occurring, as it did, in a disaffected
CHAPTER 11. BATTLE OF COLENSO.
empire lay in the phrase.
But the task was as severe a one as the most fighting General could ask
an admirable artillery. If, in spite of the advance over the open and
Boer vigilance and by rapid movements to cross the Tugela. A military
December 15th.
Bethune’s Mounted Infantry, Thorneycroft’s Mounted Infantry, three
Besides these there were no fewer than sixteen naval guns from H.M.S.
Dundonald were to cover the flank and to attack Hlangwane Hill, a
countryside. In no place could the keenest eye detect a sign of guns or
to have deployed until after the enemy’s fire had opened. Had shrapnel
monotonous crackle and rattle of the Mausers; but the air is full of
spirit and their furious desire to come to hand-grips with the enemy.
partly dammed to deepen the Drift, or, as is more probable, that in the
furiously upwards. ‘Fix bayonets, men, and let us make a name for
cool courage was beyond praise--had hard work to reform the splendid
the veld. The slogging valour of the private, the careless dash of the
and the bridge. The regiments under Hildyard’s lead were the 2nd West
fatal to the Irishmen. With a loss of some two hundred men the leading
campaigns, in which liberties may be taken with impunity, leave an evil
of horse artillery at Waterloo could do justice to the blizzard of lead
last cry as they dragged him into the shelter of a little donga hard by.
in the eyes until he too was struck down. A useless sacrifice, you may
found with sixty-four wounds in his body. Several men dropped in these
way to that further nullah in the rear where the remaining limber horses
castaways in the donga. Roberts insisted on being left where he fell,
if our gunners could not live under the fire of the enemy it would be
the handful of Devons, with their Colonel, and the Fusiliers were taken
not more than a thousand men in all, mostly irregulars, and the position
exertions of our much-enduring men.
no such attack was contemplated. After that one would have thought that,
we had inflicted as well as endured punishment, for the enemy remained
to increase the number of their prisoners. Colonel Thackeray, of
against a concealed enemy with a river in his front, was so absolutely
the abandoned guns to fall into the hands of the enemy. Nor is there any
not prepared to make that demonstration which might have prevented the
to prepare. Can you last so long?
ways as much as possible. I can make food last for much longer than a

as sternly as the attacks of the enemy. He who sorely needed help
No single defeat was of vital importance in itself, but the cumulative
institutions. The same poor excuse may be made for the organs of the
hindrance from us. It is amazing to find that even the Americans could
the war sensibly decreased. It had become too absurd even for the most
with the situation and fail to demand sufficient sacrifices. Such was

5. That eleven Militia battalions be sent abroad.

than were accepted, and yet in a very short time eight thousand men from
actually arriving while the other was on the sea. These formed the 5th
Methuen after the repulse at Magersfontein had fallen back upon the
in the present and hopeful of the future. On January 1st the British
the country. Nothing could exceed the enthusiasm of the colonists at
seventeen minutes being the average time taken over question and reply.
for the remonstrance which President Kruger shortly after addressed to
that it was seldom that he had more than a brigade under his orders.
centre, exercised the troops in irregular warfare.
mounted infantry, the naval guns, and two field batteries. The rest of
Fusiliers, the 1st South Lancashire, and the York and Lancaster. The


fourteen miles, and the difficulty of retaining so extensive a line goes
off the exultant Boers until the day--supposed to be imminent--when the
as ‘commandeering the Almighty’--it is certain that in a very peculiar
circle of fire. On the east of the town, broken by the loops of the Klip
which must have followed an attempt to force them.
who showed that they were the equals of the Regulars in gallantry and
shot-torn village. Fortunately the river has worn down its banks until

the Boers had from the beginning made up their minds that here lay the
as the rifle-fire of the infantry, must have suffered very much more
Stoneman systematised the collection and issue of all the food, civil

the town they had swung round their left flank and attacked Colenso,
to suggest that the original retirement was premature. Four days passed
despatched from Estcourt to see what was going on up the line. Already
the well-known correspondent, accompanied the expedition. What might
taken. It is remarkable that of the three leaders both Haldane and
few thousands, formidable only for their mobility, lapped round the more
them was a just retribution for the excesses of Natal.]
R.F.A., two naval guns, and some hundreds of Colonial Horse.
enemy was once more occupying the line of the Tugela. He himself moved
centering. It is very certain that had Ladysmith fallen, and twelve
Imperial Light Horse, the Natal Carabineers, and the Border Mounted
the defence. Suddenly a Mauser crack and a spurt of flame--then another
vigour in execution--they are the root ideas of the soldier’s craft. So
wounded was the price which we paid for the information. There had been
companies carefully ascended, again there was the challenge, the rush,
‘They stopped and all cried out “Rifle Brigade.” Then one of them said
countrymen were killed in the scuffle, so the total loss was probably
been defeated at Colenso, and the siege was not ending but beginning.
Shell-fire has shown itself in this war to be an excellent ordeal for
children and live up to the joyous season, when the present of Santa
It may be that the Boers wished once for all to have done at all costs
robust opponents. At twelve o’clock our scouts heard the sounds of the
of small sangars, each held by from ten to twenty men. Some few of these
not a man too much. With the dawn of day it could be seen that the Boers
their position, so every shell fired had to skim over the heads of
one of the most vivid and stirring impressions which they carried from
irregulars. This end of the position was feebly fortified, and it is
to assist their comrades. Another half-battalion of Rifles came with
a strange encounter took place at point-blank range between a group of
Through the long day the fight maintained its equilibrium along the
representatives of that virile county. Admirably led by Park, their
The cheers of victory as the Devons swept the ridge had heartened the
return may ever come to us of their losses on that occasion; 80 dead
Rifle Brigade that the honours of the day are due.
came the announcement of the attack. Then after an interval of hours

that the armies of the invader would have been doubled by their kinsmen
and, like all apostates, distinguished themselves by their virulence and
General Gatacre. The latter was allotted to General French, the victor
and yet audacious, weighing his actions well, but carrying them out
by rail on November 23rd towards Arundel, the next hamlet along the
mobility very unusual for a British force. On December 13th there was
hard-riding Tasmanians, New Zealanders, and Australians, with the Scots
time Colonel Porter, with the half-battery of O, his own regiment (the
about a thousand of them under General Schoeman to turn the left flank
of Colesberg lies in a basin surrounded by a ring of kopjes, and the
was leading. When half-way up a warm fire was opened upon them in the
boy subaltern, was killed, wounded, or taken. Eleven officers and
Some skirmishing followed, but the position was maintained. On the 15th
is difficult to give an intelligible account of the details of these
and one was wounded.
be localised by the Boers, was opened upon their laagers, which had to
Rimington Guides, and the composite Household Regiment; his artillery,
to the impossibility of any single correspondent having a clear idea of
Australian Regiment, which had been changed from infantry to cavalry,
the Tasmanians, the Australians, and the Inniskillings, came in contact
what they did upon this occasion, and the first intimation which the
British fire became so deadly that that of the Boers was dominated.
nearly a hundred wounded or missing, most of which was incurred when the
they were employed in detached parties in fulfilling the duties which
Rensburg. It was a difficult operation in the face of an aggressive
so long in extending the lines, but it might be regarded with equanimity
himself back at Arundel once more. French, the stormy petrel of the war,
evil day when his infantry had retired, and his ten guns had not,
weight of metal. His cavalry was still weak in proportion to his other
      2nd East Surrey.
      Woodgate’s Brigade.
      one squadron 13th Hussars; Royal Engineers.

to those less fortunate officers whose private enterprise has ended in
state that the wagons could hardly move, heavy rain had just fallen,
Mount Alice. ‘Over our bodies,’ said the men with the spades and
Hildyard’s) were marched rapidly on the night of the 16th to the real
when twenty miles are less than fourteen, and it was hoped that this
A small success, the more welcome for its rarity, came to the British
upon the Boer right. Midway between the two movements the formidable
meant the carrying of ridge after ridge. In the earlier stages of the
ground which the enemy had held. A gallant colonial, Tobin of the South
answered by the enemy. About eleven the infantry began to go forward
what point the final assault should be delivered. On the right front,

leader had threaded their way up into the advance. Then the leading
trench faced them, but it was weakly held and abandoned. Then the men,
a cross fire both from the left and right. Beyond were other eminences
position was searched by their bullets. Early in the action the gallant
brigade, the Middlesex, the Dorsets, and the Somersets, together with
Thorneycroft, a man of huge physique, rushed forward to the advancing
the crowded plateau marvelled at the endurance which held the devoted
hang-backs, and many a man was wandering down the reverse slopes when he
situated as it was, could not save the infantry from the horrible
and to prepare two emplacements upon the top, but in his advance he met
Some lay in an overpowering drowsiness. The most were doggedly patient
note that he fell with a Boer bullet through his brain, making one more
whether he should hold on for another such day as he had endured, or
is doubtful whether even his steadfast soul would not have flinched from
no one was more astonished than he when he found, on the report of two
‘Where are the bosses?’ cried a Fusilier, and the historian can only
matter. In this judgment he would probably have the concurrence of
pigeon-hole from which they should never have been drawn.

no better off than when they started. Buller still held the commanding
this labyrinth of hills with its fringe of death. So doubtless they
once more to have another try to win a way to Ladysmith. It was known
Ford at Potgieter’s and commanded the country beyond with heavy guns on
commenced and was sustained with much fuss and appearance of energy
gunners has been one of the most striking features of the war, but it
The 4-pounders and 6-pounders of which Prince Kraft discourses would
went, the flitting figures, springing from cover to cover, stooping,
British advance, flew out suddenly from behind its cover, like a hare
marred General Buller’s previous operations again prevented him from

in the first days of the movement which ended at Spion Kop might with an
of men upon a hill-top, exposed to shell fire from several directions
of one enormous gun--a 96-pound Creusot, the longest of all Long
must betray it. With smokeless powder the guns are so invisible that
function of infantry is to shoot, and not to act like spearmen in the
through some freak of gunnery, lobbed slowly through a division, and the
save that another pontoon bridge had been constructed during the day.
nightfall came the conclusion that the guns were too many, that the
sordid evils which had steadily grown from inconvenience to misfortune
for a last supreme effort. This time, at least, the soldiers hoped that
flank attacked or its communications cut, as was the case in the Spion
colonial cavalry, two battalions of infantry, and a battery, made a
Facing them now were the formidable Boer lines of Hlangwane Hill and
face of any resistance. Fortunately, Cingolo Hill was very weakly held,
them on the 18th proved to be far easier than they had dared to hope.
guns a great deal of the north side, including those Colenso trenches
their extreme left flank, as by an advance upon this line we should have
with musketry fire. The brigade held its own, but lost the Brigadier
a belt of low rolling ground, which was gradually cleared by the advance
operations had been carried out with a monotony of gallantry. Always the
in his accuracy, he actually at the battle of Colenso drilled the Irish
in order to teach them not to shrink from fire. Amid the laughter of his
to be taken lay on the right, and the soldiers were compelled to pass in
and charged desperately onwards for the second one. It was a supremely
earth was there a retreat of which the survivors had less reason to be
exultation, friend Boer! Friend Boer did attempt it, and skilfully too,
is he who pays with the best grace. The attack was well prepared, well
Hart’s men could not carry it by assault it was hard to say who could.
at bay; so he reverted to that flanking movement which, as events
In the meantime, through a contretemps between our outposts and the
heavy artillery fire, the British right became the left and the left
would have been a matter of extreme difficulty; but now, with the heavy
was that on which the Irish Brigade was still crouching, ready at any

the stormers along the sky-line and know that the position is theirs.
The Boers had lost some five hundred in killed, wounded, and prisoners.
and that, moving on these lines, they would, Cronje or no Cronje, have
commanding hills, had held out for 118 days. They had endured two
with the pressure of their accoutrements, as they staggered after
and holding the confidence of his men that in the face of repulse after
So the riddle of the Tugela had at last been solved. Even now, with all
of continual occurrence from the beginning to the end of the siege,
might not have been more rapidly extricated by keeping to the original
that he would have been in Bloemfontein by Christmas and at the Vaal
of surrender. Let it be acknowledged that Buller’s was the hardest
onwards, and a disinclination to take a risk or to endure heavy
baggage, then its day is indeed past.
and that the light of peace was dimly breaking far away--that was why
town which they had come to succour. Before I describe how that succour
from being helpless in the presence of the enemy. But the cannon were
traits which may, without extravagance, be called Napoleonic. The
It was on October 15th that the fifty thousand inhabitants of Kimberley
around it which had been such bad neighbours to Ladysmith. Picturesque


deplorable. Every credit may be given to him for all his aid to the
head. It was only on the small children that the scarcity of milk told
circumstances it is in modern warfare long odds always upon the defence,
gleaming in the sunshine. Next morning the low grumble of distant cannon
down under their confinement. Their interest, however, was keenly
precedent of the Germans in 1870, were fired not at the forts, but into
never any prospects of surrender the utmost impatience began to be
the New Zealanders.’ Macaulay in his wildest dream of the future of the
martial rattle and jingle towards the cheering crowds. Amid shouts and
about to fall upon their left flank, a strong demonstration ending in
carried back from the engagement. On the field of battle he turns to the
three-quarters of a mile to the north-west of the drift formed the key
while the men of his company took turns to squeeze the artery. But our
they were needed for those great operations which were pending. It
left it on record that the sight which surprised him most in India was
knight. Soldiers and regimental officers have for him a feeling of
exploits of the fine force of cavalry which, after a ride of a hundred
12th Lancers from Modder River, the 16th Lancers from India, the Scots

fire and confidence upon their way.
could be seen sweeping over the plain, or stopping with that curiosity
the bushes which skirt the banks of that ill-favoured stream. With
Boer force saved itself by flight, and the camp, the wagons, and the
Kelly-Kenny should come up with the infantry to hold what had been
or fifty Boers were cut down in the pursuit. It appears to have been

command of their colonel, Lord Airlie, held back the threatened flank
A few more words as a sequel to this short sketch of the siege and
obstinately holding on to Dronfield, and still their position was too
force of cavalry should ride round the Boer position and raise the siege

      14th Brigade (Chermside).
   19th Brigade (Smith-Dorrien).
and almost waterless country. Seven hundred wagons drawn by eleven
carried the place after a sharp skirmish, chiefly remarkable for the
Boers, a dashing exploit which struck us upon what was undoubtedly our
convoy, which contained forage and provisions, had no guard of its own,
of power. In the evening the latter swayed altogether in favour of the
with heavy hearts and bitter words that those who had fought so long
thing to abandon his trenches and his rifle pits. But he was crafty
north round Kimberley to Warrenton; many of the Freestaters also had
Magersfontein, and the wagon bullocks were exhausted. It was impossible,
the 81st field battery hurried up in time to add its deep roar to their
bank of the Modder, with his stores and guns still intact, and no enemy
The nearest drift to Cronje was only a mile or two distant, Klipkraal
small and hardly recorded, was really a very essential one in the
and this had already been done by as smart a piece of work as any in the
the column marched over the shadowy veld under the brilliant stars. By

Do what he would, there was no possible loophole for escape.
should be complete. There seems, however, to be no doubt that he was
prove once more what had already been so amply proved, that bravery can
charge which was the admiration of all who saw it. If the miners of
shells had fallen among the wagons and their combustible stores.
of our attack and the grimness of the Boer resistance. The distribution
A repulse it may have been, but they hear no name of which they may be

strategically upon their part, for it gave their beleaguered comrades
resolution with which the gallant farmers held out, and award to Cronje

Potchefstroom, iron-handed ruler of natives, reviler of the British,
16th Lancers, the Household Cavalry, and two other batteries skirted the
fearful place were such that the stench alone might have compelled
of February 26th it was determined that Smith-Dorrien’s men should try
darkness, knowing that at any instant a blaze of fire such as flamed
light the men as they lay and scraped desperately for cover could see
the right was hardly in better plight. All firing had ceased for the
were in. To this message Colonel Kincaid, R.E., now in command of the
Boer warren. ‘The burghers have had enough; what are they to do?’ said
and carried a small whip in his hands. His appearance was that of a
Transvaal and eleven hundred of the Free State. That the latter were not
Strong-nerved men came back white and sick from a contemplation of the
A fortnight had elapsed since Lord Roberts had launched his forces from
at last was a reputation so well founded that even South African warfare
The surrender of Cronje had taken place on February 27th, obliterating
The force which had been hovering to the south and east of him during

Lord Roberts’s plan was absolutely simple, and yet, had it been carried
support this movement. Meanwhile Tucker was to push straight along the
The result of this very decisive flight was to derange all calculations
kopje and poured so galling a fire upon the right wing that the whole
if we could not pass over it. At the other side of that little
if the Boers lost as many. The finest military display on the British
wings were protected, the northern by the river and the southern by
Roberts’s central column, and so masked the latter. The essence of the
their position in small bodies as the crackling, swaying line of the
do for complete success had been done; but tactically it was a poor
in a pitched battle. Surprises and skirmishes were many, but it was the
a Boer force a hill was seized by a squadron of Greys with some mounted
the country than any degree of mere valour untempered by judgment.
turning and appeared upon the broad open plain to the south, where
real sympathies, had hoisted union jacks upon their houses. Spectators
more sturdily, nor have served her more loyally, than these their worthy
the 15th the cavalry covered forty miles, fought an action, and relieved
battle of Paardeberg was a blot upon the operations; but the strategy of

The Boer idea of a strong attack upon this point was strategically
On February 27th, Major Butcher, supported by the Inniskillings and
forces, and Clements was despatched to Phillipolis, Fauresmith, and
had established a remarkable influence over his rough followers. To the
Howe. ‘They are right on the top of us,’ he cried to his comrades, as he
to Olive Siding, to the south of the Bethulie Bridge.
the end of the bridge it was found that all was ready to blow it up, the
The Boers were in a trench commanding the bridge, and their brisk fire
On that road bridge and on the pontoon bridge at Norval’s Pont Lord

Brabant’s Horse played a distinguished part. On March 4th the division
wounded, held on to the heights which command the river. A week or ten

guns mounted in such a way as to command the Dundee and Newcastle roads.
south the reputation which he had won in the north of Africa. In the
state, and in which his presence had a peculiar significance, since he
between Paul Kruger and Lord Salisbury. There is an old English jingle

of Her Majesty’s Government, we consider it our duty to solemnly declare
overwhelming pre-eminence of the British Empire, conscious that that

then instantly arrested his enemies--the man whose name was a by-word
the two Republics under the conventions which then were in existence.
large portion of the two Colonies was overrun with great destruction to
having in recent years acquiesced in the existence of the two Republics.

they could come was by two single-line railways which unite into one
conquered enemies. It is strange to think that we are separated by only
gentlemen troopers of India and Ceylon, and everywhere the wild South
impolitic to insist upon at the time, began with the occupation of
served their country more truly than the officers and men of the medical
for the medical man who has emerged from a hospital full of water-born
by the universal testimony of the farmers of that district have been
advance, and these had been occupied by a strong body of the enemy
caused the complete abandonment of the position, it is difficult to
shell killed five of the latter regiment. Chermside’s brigade was now
From March 29th until May 2nd Karee remained the advanced post.
between Bloemfontein and Thabanchu are intersected midway by the Modder
field-cornet, but found that strong bodies of the enemy were moving upon
first night near the waterworks, halfway upon his journey.
upon the camp. The surprise was complete. But the refinement of the Boer
Broadwood’s retreating column now found itself on a huge plain which
cut off to a man. Across the veld, some miles from the waterworks, there
were enormous. One was that a force coming the other way (Colvile’s
and continue on their course. The idea of an ambush could not suggest
upon Roberts’s Horse, who were abreast of the guns. ‘Files a bout!
dashed frantically for a place of safety. At the same instant every Boer
minutes calm and a settled purpose.
It was no slight task to extricate that sorely stricken force from the
twelve-pounder guns--five from U battery and two from Q. Of U battery
of some loss to themselves helped to extricate the disordered force.
Smith-Dorrien’s may safely be called upon for any exertions. The
restive upon the subject, and were sometimes inclined to question
they had all three, as at Wepener or Mafeking, they could hold out
more frequent and more serious. It is deplorable that the white flag
Without artillery they were powerless, but, having seized a kopje, they
and he had collected a force of fifteen hundred men, entrained
that his total force was small and that he had to cover a long stretch
direct his own against it, he brushed it away before him; but the manner
their force there so as to make a strong movement which should coincide
in exactly the same position which our men had been in twenty-four hours

in some respects was being reorganised. One powerful weapon which was
infantry were in the field. Of these the 1st (Methuen’s) and half

the cold southerly winds of a Cape winter. Neither our Government, our
The main force of the Freestaters had assembled in the north-eastern

Wepener, was a very strong one, and it would have taken a larger force
Captain Lukin’s management of the artillery was particularly skilful.
losses were less than those of the victorious defenders. At the end of
spirit of free men, whose individualism has been encouraged rather
communication with Wepener, that he was sure that the place could hold
line of retreat. The movement was made with reassuring slowness and
Rundle, as senior officer, being in command. As they marched the blue
turned them out so often before and since. Yet a long-range action began
covering the Wepener Boers, and being in turn covered by the Boers of
and the casualties fell. The 9th Lancers, the regular cavalry regiment
disappear. The combined movement was an admirable piece of work on
While Rundle and French had advanced on Dewetsdorp as described, the
the defence. By evening we had regained the waterworks, a most important
reminded the observer that Hamilton, as a young lieutenant, had known
was one of the latter, while Marshall’s Horse, a colonial corps raised
mixture of circumspection and audacity, the way in which French and
Boer force was a compact body some six or seven thousand strong, which
came under a heavy fire of our infantry, and fifty of them were wounded
advance.
Before entering upon a description of that great and decisive movement,
Dugdale) and a company of the Scots Guards. The wagons were on their
flew the white flag, and the good housewife remained behind to charge
Rundle, and Ian Hamilton, were despatched to cut it off. It successfully
present assets but immense aspirations. In its litter of corrugated-iron
ordinary circumstances any force shut up there was doomed to capture.
brain quality in his bravery which is rare among our officers. Full

an armoured train conveying two 7-pounders for the Mafeking defences was
the British Empire. These men were of the same stamp as those other
the Boers. On this the armoured train and a squadron of the Protectorate
flight of shells fell into the town. The enemy got possession of the
force who at their own time and their own place could at any moment
smaller pieces, played upon the town. The result was as futile as our

which had been held by the enemy’s sharpshooters, and on the 7th another
strengthened as to be impregnable without scaling ladders. The attacking
the offensive, and that from then onwards he must content himself by
usually observed, and the snipers who had exchanged rifle-shots all the
The garrison, in the face of increasing losses and decreasing food,
lands to the west of the town, which could not all be guarded by the
October. So close were the advanced trenches upon either side that both
may be given here of the Rhodesian column. Their action did not affect
were as formidable opponents as the world could show.
telegraphed that women were weeping in the streets of the Boer capital.
hundred and twenty frontiersmen, and so effective was their fire that
body of Boers. Of the twenty men most got away, but the chaplain J.W.
operating from the north along the railway line with Mafeking for its
as Ramathlabama, within a day’s march of Mafeking. He had with him,
In the meantime Mafeking--abandoned, as it seemed, to its fate--was
again upon Kimberley. They knew also that Plumer’s force had been
the keenness of the emotions which they had aroused, the garrison
which was at once set on fire by them. The first building of any size
fire. At seven o’clock in the evening they recognised that their
British losses in this admirably managed affair. On May 17th, five
Police, and 100 volunteers from the Fusilier brigade, with M battery
British. On May 15th the relieving column arrived without further
a broader gauge to Marandellas, sent on in coaches for hundreds of miles
held their ground, and their artillery fire was, as usual, most
the towns folk who bore their trial so long and so bravely--and to the

faces and brisk feet that the centre column left Bloemfontein on May
of the State, and at the moment of his advance his forces covered a

widespread British line one would then, after an interval of seven or

the left arm swept round and drove the Boer force from their position.
6th) the army moved across the difficult drift of the Vet River, and


upon the British side and a steady retirement upon that of the Boers. On
their way.
a sharp action at Rooidam, while Mahon’s Mafeking relief column had
Hoopstad being his immediate objective. The little union jacks which

strain at Ladysmith had told upon them, and the men whom we had to meet
ruled to conform to the customs of every other civilised State upon the
necessary to wait until the railway should be repaired. This gave time


and rear were continually attacked, and these signs of forces outside
but the wide turning movements on the flanks by the indefatigable French
be, were saddened by the thought that it should have deliberately
faded grasses lay such riches as Solomon never took from Ophir. It was
handiwork of the enemy. Hamilton and French, moving upon the left flank,
as any of those which had been carried through at the beginning of the
infantry got their grip of the railway and held it. The exploit was a
from all nations. The Boer officials were themselves divided in opinion,
capital, the seat of government, the home of Kruger, the centre of
make their way back with a loss of five killed and fourteen wounded.
which might have been a serious one. The Boers appear to have been the
Between the hills was a narrow neck, and beyond the Boer capital.
Brigade, Stephenson’s Brigade, and Maxwell’s Brigade streamed up and
of Norfolk, who had shown a high sense of civic virtue in laying aside
time.
a brisk shell fire from a Boer gun upon the ridge. Many pieces of good
and the London Volunteers. For over two hours the khaki waves with their
and a wider liberty from that 5th of June which saw the symbol of their
De Wet, Prinsloo, and Olivier. Above all, they had a splendid position,
score of his successes would be amusing were it not that the points of
high ground, and so to get the Pass into their complete possession.
which would place it to the rear of Laing’s Nek, and close to the
The withdrawal of the compromised army after Spion Kop, the change of
Heidelberg to join hands with him. Such was the position of the Natal
By the rapidity of his movements he succeeded in gaining the enemy’s
with a large sum of money, estimated at over two millions sterling,
which the guns could in case of need be removed. The whole position was

task was to carry a carefully prepared position held by at least ten
in the campaign make the mistake of advancing before the way had been
his weary men slept upon the ground which they had held. All Monday and
to picturesque warfare. Perceiving a gap in the enemy’s line, Hamilton
the heart. ‘Pray moderate your language!’ was his last characteristic
they had succeeded, before the closing in of the winter night, in
The infantry clung in a long fringe to the edge of the position, but for
was thrown into the firing line, and the Boer reply was decreasing in
curious revenges. Already Paardeberg had come upon Majuba Day. Buller’s
excursions, which served no end save to keep the army from ennui. In
situation in the Free State.
this campaign, to his own proud disregard of danger.
unbroken for two months, when the operations ended in the capture of the
prevent them from coming west, and falling upon the railway line?
Christian de Wet, the elder of two brothers of that name, was at this
the best of the horses. Well armed, well mounted, and operating in
Eastern Province Horse, upon whom fell all the mounted work. By evil
there for a stand which would have brought glory to the British arms.
much more mobile than his own. His cavalry at that date consisted of 100
days it would have been possible for the officer in command to make such
of a force of 470) show that the Yeomanry took considerable punishment
May 28th. He had with him the 9th Brigade (Douglas’s), which contained
had to fight their way back to Lindley with some loss, including Colonel
leads to another, for, had the Yeomanry held out at Lindley, De Wet
encamped in a position which could be completely commanded by artillery.
have tried the oldest soldiers, the brave miners did well. They never

the British volunteer and of the British regular to his bag of militia.
dynamite until they looked like an unfinished line to heaven. De Wet’s
to fight pitched battles. Methuen pushed for the south, having been

between Kroonstad and Roodeval, was the scene of his new raid. On that
with three guns firing shell and shrapnel, was a very good performance.
forces were able to join hands, and so to completely cut off the Free
extreme left, the garrison of Lindley under Paget, the garrison of
Horse, with yeomanry, mounted infantry, two 5-inch guns, and the 38th
handled, for the Boer riflemen were able, by creeping up a donga, to
The place is surrounded by hills, and the enemy was found strongly
a regiment means that the occasion will seem favourable. Up they went in
A word now as to that force under General Hunter which was closing in
and Clements.
hilly country some miles to the south of the Vaal River, where he
the strong pass of Retief’s Nek, but on the 24th they were compelled
greatly rewarded. Upon the success of their turning movement depended

them in. Upon July 29th, Prinsloo sent in a request for an armistice,
guns, two of which were our own. But Olivier, with fifteen hundred men
distance shortened by two-thirds, while the army came to be on the
Ventersdorp, from Rustenburg, came news of risings against the newly
how helpless Lord Roberts was until his remounts should arrive. The
many instances, the deserted houses which had once been their homes.
Botha engaged the attention of Lord Roberts by energetic demonstrations
bore up against a deadly fire, waiting for the help which never came.
‘Black Horse’ sustained their historical reputation, and fought their
cricketer, worked the gun with his own hands until he also fell wounded
difficult for De Wet and his men to hinder their arrival. The last horse
was not yet, but already its futility was abundantly evident. This had
French and Hutton to the south, all converged upon it. There was no
much accelerated by the transference of De la Rey and his burghers to
and reinvigorated by De la Rey’s success at Uitval’s Nek. On July 18th
horses. The fortunate arrival of Captain FitzClarence with the
since Methuen was needed to complete the cordon round De Wet, recalled
Carrington to relieve the place on August 5th had been beaten back, and
corps of Rhodesians. Under Hore were Major Hopper of the Rhodesians, and
ballad-makers of Australia seek for a subject, let them turn to Elands
a decisive ending. This Sir Charles Warren, with his special local
volunteers, some of Paget’s horse and of the 8th Regiment Imperial
same thing occurred with more murderous effect, the train running at
pom-pom. They could make no impression, however, upon the steady
drift for a time. At present the two obviously important things were
a dash for the Transvaal, in the hope of joining hands with De la Rey’s
Potchefstroom, and instant orders had been sent to him to block the
reason not come up. Methuen alone was numerically inferior to the men he
Smith-Dorrien’s infantry, in crossing the railway line, and that he had
brave fellows covered sixty-six miles in seventy-six hours in their
It was fully understood that Olifant’s Nek was held by the British, so
Little Crocodile River, where he summoned Baden-Powell to surrender, and
a German lieutenant in the Transvaal Artillery. On its merits it is
signed passes in his pocket. It was against such abuses that the extra
army of Natal veterans off the railway line and advanced to a position
skirmishes were fought between Vlakfontein and Greylingstad in order
men, surrendered to Clery. On the 15th, still skirmishing, Buller’s men
left flank. Here he found the Boers in considerable numbers, but he
under incessant fire. The evening found him only six miles to the south
they left the banks of the Tugela.
On the first day the movement upon Buller’s part consisted in a very
over the position, though Metcalfe, the brave colonel of the Rifles,
and a long experience of defeat in the field had weakened their nerve
While Buller had established himself firmly upon the left of the Boer
was not yet a rout.
in their flight.
force, though ready for anything which might be asked of it, had gone
On September 3rd Lord Roberts, finding how strong a position faced

less than half were accounted for by one of those strange malignant
the extreme coolness and audacity of the Boer gunners. ‘When the cavalry
British prisoners and taking possession of forty locomotives, which do
northward trek. How piteous this ending to all his strivings and his
all his own. And now what had come of it all? A handful of faithful
moving northwards after the capitulation of Prinsloo at Fouriesburg,
thirty-two killed and wounded. Nothing daunted by his failure, Olivier
Ladybrand, which was held by a feeble garrison consisting of one company
covering a mile and a half of ground, endured a heavy shell and rifle
endurance of the troops.
Grobler’s commando was faced by Paget’s brigade. On August 18th the
Cape Town to make arrangements for taking over the police force of the
and had then taken his force on to Mafeking to refit. Before leaving
serious, as De la Rey’s main force appears to have been concentrated
and a great quantity of stores. On the 14th he ran down a convoy and
Hart at Potchefstroom, Hildyard in the Utrecht district, Macdonald in
sense of their faithful service. One of them in the Orange River Colony,
Two other small actions performed at this period of the war demand a
of Vice-President, and the notorious Ben Viljoen had become first
of these refugees increased. On September 17th special trains were
On September 24th came the last chapter in this phase of the campaign in
Small bands had slipped away to the north and the south, but they were

origin rather in the hope of vengeance than of victory, inflicted much
So it was at Stormberg; so it was at Colenso; so it may have been at
in the Free State. But, as the months went on and the struggle still
what they regarded as the abuses of lenity was very great, and they
of a large force. They made their way into the settled districts, and
those garrisons which was not liable to be attacked upon the road, and
in the Magaliesberg, Hart at Potchefstroom, Lyttelton at Middelburg,
he had led from the first days in Natal, was covering the line from
range. On the 15th the desultory sniping freshened again into a skirmish
Boers, and soon it was rumoured that it was no other than Christian De
action once more, and fired by the hope of cutting off an isolated
entirely surrounding the British force, and it was evident that they
About noon several companies of Scots and Welsh Fusiliers advanced from
much for their courage that they took that perilous choice rather than
Imperial Light Horse were for some reason slow to charge. Had they done
is to be deplored, but it is difficult to see how any rules of civilised
As Barton was in direct and constant telegraphic communication with
gunners, was regained by that very U battery to which it belonged.
had the effect of a most elaborate stratagem, since it persuaded the
men to oppose to over a thousand, Lean sent back for reinforcements
Boer position. The British made no attempt to attack, but contented
men of the 5th Mounted Infantry, and two guns in the centre, forty-six
tide began slowly to turn. The Boers were themselves outflanked by the
Eighty-two unwounded Boers filed out of the enclosure, and the total
breath. The British total losses were twelve killed (four officers) and
following De Wet, however, it is necessary to say something of
and recruiting its strength from a district which had been hardly
killed or wounded. Fauresmith was attacked on October 19th, but was also
up upon the tents in which they cowered, so that the affair seems not to
Bothaville, leaving his guns but not his courage behind him. Trekking
a semicircle of steep rocky hills broken in the centre by a gully. The
terrible, but the garrison still, with black lips and parched tongues,
of the Boer leaders.
replace his useless animals. So numerous were they that many of the
skirmish at Vaalbank, had trekked swiftly south to Bethulie, and was now
reappear glistening upon the southern bank. Everywhere there were signs
recognising that the game was up, the Boer leader doubled back for the
trek as well by night as by day, it says much for the energy of Knox
fort upon either side of it. There was only one way to safety, for
Springhaan. Parsons’s force followed Haasbroek up and engaged him, but
miles, there was sporadic warfare everywhere, attacks upon scattered
upon the other. Methuen moved about incessantly through the broken
Hart’s sphere of action was originally round Potchefstroom. On September
ammunition, while General Kitchener, the brother of the Sirdar, broke
same district. Mere route marches without a very definite and adequate
Henry Prinsloo and General Joachim Fourie, were killed, while General
16th they lost six killed and twenty wounded, and from the day that they
and eighteen of the 66th battery were killed or wounded. On the
truckload of Boers behind every engine would have stopped the practice
Lyttelton from Middelburg should endeavour to get behind them. The force
is no light matter.
ill-suited, however, to the use of artillery, and it was only possible
in three places and killed. Five out of six officers of the New Zealand
A hundred killed and wounded was the price paid by the British for that

himself as he approached the hills in the presence of a force of Boers
very large one, consisting of 150 wagons, which covered about three
evidence that a remonstrance was addressed from the convoy before it
the post upon the Delagoa Railway at which the British prisoners had
a disadvantage. We had thought that the days of battles in this war
between the camp and the mountains were aware of moving figures in front
as any in the war. But Clements himself had appeared upon the scene, and
looked up towards the beetling crags above them. What were they waiting
advantage over the regular. A helio on the hill cried for help. The
to share the general disaster. The head of the line of hard-breathing
or taken. It is not true that the supply of cartridges ran out, and the
it. ‘We must get a red flag up, or we shall be blown off the face of the
slowly forward, quickening its pace as the men pulled on the drag-ropes,
hill, which is called Yeomanry Hill, and opened fire upon the camp,
later at Rustenburg. Of the Boer losses it is, as usual, impossible
General Broadwood’s 2nd Cavalry Brigade had been stationed to the north
made by Broadwood. On hearing the result he fell back upon Rustenburg,
result was that both upon the 19th and 20th the Boers were shelled out
in each instance was beaten back with heavy loss to the assailants. A
infantry. They held a hill about half a mile north of the town, and
under a heavy fire for twelve hours. Mangles also, the gallant son of
without any attempt at connecting them. The first is the long-drawn-out

November with his small column down the border of the Orange River

nearly half his force and fiercely attacked by a victorious and exultant
humiliating evidence of their victory. One post, under Captain Wilkinson
of war. By the middle of November the three different corps of the City
found a series of disconnected operations, in which we were uniformly
the war. He remembered, no doubt, how Grant had given Lee’s army their
than a year. There has been no rest, no days off to recruit, no going
distances, and that often on very short supplies of food. You have
more difficult by the openly expressed sympathy with the Boers from
With the turn of the war the discontent in Cape Colony became less
Fortunately the good sense of the assembly prevailed, and the agitation,
Had De Wet, in the operations which have already been described, evaded
among the mountain ranges. They moved swiftly about, obtaining remounts
reaching almost to the sea in the Mossel Bay direction. Yet the
learning that British forces were already converging upon them, they
Venterstad, they made for Steynsberg, fighting two indecisive skirmishes
brought up to strength again, and now two new regiments were added,
over a wide front, the Boers swept southwards. On or about January 4th
of war the same energy and thoroughness with which he had made the polo
mountainous in South Africa. Between the two points, and nearer to De
coloured man named Esan forms one more incident in the dark story of the
for the railway at Victoria West, and was despatched from that place on
not appear to have obtained any large number of recruits, were able to
Oudtshoorn the Boer vanguard flitted in and out of the hills, Haig’s
Wet, and his evacuation of the country was never complete, as was the

their country might have stretched their patience to the breaking-point.
recruit and recuperate in the amazing way which a Boer army has. There
been a fortunate one for the invaders. A patrol of Kitchener’ s newly
thrown themselves, under Nairne and Milne, into a donga, which gave some
can excuse the wilful mutilation and torture which is inflicted by these
the profit to the victors, since they were unable to carry away their
twenty miles north of Winburg, the Boer leader was ready for one of his
to live with their families in Government laagers until such time as
amenity of British rule, and being convinced of the hopelessness of the
become so poor that they will be the working class in the country, and
man having been thrashed with a sjambok before being put to death.
south as far as Smithfield, and then, detaching several small bodies to
Lyttelton at Naauwpoort directed the operations, and the possession of
15th, moving upon a front of six or eight miles. Two armoured trains
however, to be atrocious, rain and hail falling with such violence
invaluable spare horses. It is said also that he had been able to
were closing swiftly in upon him, while the swollen river still barred
Once safely in his own country again, the guerilla chief pursued his way
columns which were ready to his hand in effecting a drive up the
night between the British columns and escaped. Pilcher, Bethune, and

affairs. The latter comprises the operations of Babington and of
force which might expose itself. Several mounted columns had been formed
these to get ahead. Presently C squadron, which was behind, was ordered
upheld. The Boer victors walked in among the litter of stricken men
incidents tend, however, to shake the belief that scouting is better
men, of which 1300 were infantry belonging to the Royal Irish, the
The attack broke first upon Monument Hill, a post held by Captain
until Marshall and nine out of his twelve Shropshires had been hit. Then
attacks upon six other stations were none of them pressed home, and were
have been under the command of Beyers, upon its way to join the Boer
rough and useful work awaited him. The two towns were at once invested
badly wounded and afterwards taken prisoner at Warm Baths. The

interesting as having been begun in Queen Victoria’s reign, and ended in
some of the South African Constabulary, made his way round the flank,
fighting commandos some information as to the hopelessness of the
its course the fortitude of Great Britain and of the Empire had never
beside him. Judging from the sounds of mirth heard by those without, the
be administered as Crown colonies. Law courts should be independent
returned by General Botha to the effect that nothing short of total
cable, a letter was written by Reitz, State Secretary of the Transvaal,
desperate and prolonged resistance against a vastly superior antagonist.
cavalry, mounted infantry, and Yeomanry were sent from home. Ten
several shrewd blows which materially weakened their resources in men
Kop, Paardefontein and Lilliefontein, in each of which the enemy was
the Boers left eighteen of their dead upon the position which they had
burghers were constrained to descend into the open veld. There seemed
the difficult task of driving it from end to end. For this enterprise
huge drag net, of which Wonderfontein and Greylingstad formed the ends,
Smith-Dorrien at Carolina the other columns started, their centre of

Bothwell Farm.
heavy had been the fire which had swept through the sleeping camp.
a disorganised array which he computed at 5000 in front of them. A party
on the 14th he reported 46 more Boer casualties and 146 surrenders, with
the movement would have been even more successful had the weather been
country that Babington moved in March with Klerksdorp for his base. On
they succeeded in withdrawing themselves and their pom-pom without
Kraal, the enemy falling back before him. Next morning the British again
but wilder still was the rush of the fiery cavalry behind them. For once
Babington, rushed Smuts’s laager at daylight and effected a further
Colonel Park from Lydenburg, which resulted between them in the
of the Boer commandos must be very much impaired. It was recognised
These little forts were dotted along the railways at points not more
this great tract of country there was not a village and hardly a
behind them. A General might well pause before plunging his troops into
Warm Baths), it was hoped that a swift advance might seize it before any
of its danger, but it was no light task to advance so great a distance

unnecessary delay the dispositions were made, and no fewer than eight
trekked over the veld, through the formidable Chunies Pass, and so
had distinguished himself by his systematic and effective guardianship

their leader, were captured in the north by the gallantry and wit of a
a mere raid, but that steps should be taken to secure all that he had
riflemen were driven off, and the gun was blown up by its faithful
on May 5th. They had something to show, however, for the loss of their
reaching England from Lord Kitchener which showed that from three to
shortly afterwards Cunningham had been repulsed at Middelfontein, and
search of the buried guns. His force was divided into three parts,
through the veil of smoke a body of five hundred Boers charged suddenly

advance. Forty-one of them were left dead upon the ground. Six officers
there were no reserves behind the fighting line of the Boers.
treatment of the Boers has been unexampled in all military history for
Bullock co-operated from the Natal line. Again the results were
at a place called Wilmansrust, due south of Middelburg, and between
opened fire at point-blank range upon the sleeping men. The rifles were
affair, which gave them a fresh supply of stores and clothing at a time
were, as a matter of fact, rapidly transferred from one side of the
the same period Babington, Dixon, and Rawlinson were co-operating in the

No sooner, however, had Methuen laid down one weapon than he snatched
On September 6th and 8th Methuen engaged the main body of De la Rey in
the truth of which was much debated but finally established, in which
whittling away wagons, horses, and men from that nucleus of resistance
loss of ten casualties and thirty prisoners. Thus in the heart of a
British birth, distinguished, or disgraced, themselves by this unsavoury
Colonel Vandeleur, an officer of great promise, was killed and twenty
might be conveyed to the camps. Some consternation was caused in England
Passing to the Orange River Colony we find that during this winter
their labours was rapidly approaching.
precautions. One warm-hearted officer seems actually to have sallied out
But the men who faced them were veterans also, and the defence made up
survivors breathed a prayer of thanks as they saw on the southern
small British column to the town of Reitz upon July 11th, which resulted
events of history turn! Two Boer generals, two commandants, Steyn’s
twice-cleared districts of Rouxville and Smithfield. The country in the
journey that Sladen’s Mounted Infantry had the sharp experience which
July and August were occupied in the Orange River Colony by energetic
as Celliers, Villonel, and young Cronje, fighting against their
is very open to question. This date may be said to mark the conclusion
the Central Colony, whence they struck again and again at the railway
down these scattered and insignificant bands; but as a matter of fact
indicated in these pages.
Alexander, and others. These two sets of miniature armies performed an
Early in May two passengers sailed for Europe, the journey of each being
fellow-countrymen. He returned in August as Lord Milner to the scene of
and forty-one prisoners were the fruits of his little victory, which
leader threw himself upon Jamestown, overwhelmed the sixty townsmen who
bore fruit, for the commandos were still better mounted and lighter than
Transkei in order to obtain horses and supplies. It was a desperate
the enemy away and captured their laager. Seven killed and seventeen
took place among the hills thirty miles to the west of Graaf-Reinet.
long strain, but the execution of rebels by the British, though much to
north, driving the guerillas in front of them. Scheepers in his usual
columns now turned their attention, with the result that Lategan,
River.
with some dynamite. A few days later, on September 10th, a similar blow,

detachment remained true to the spirited motto of the corps, and that no
the British forces having yet got the legs of the Boers, after having
In connection with this account of operations within the Colony, there
were almost exterminated. The position was covered with bush, and the
system of clearing certain districts, one at a time, and endeavouring by
allowed almost a free hand for some months, while the roving bands were
barren lands of the west, until, in the following April, they had got as
The young Boer leader, Scheepers, had long been a thorn in the side of
wounded and captured while endeavouring to cross the line near Hanover
of several bodies could any enterprise higher than the looting of a
extricated itself with severe loss from a most perilous plight. The
small British force was fiercely assailed on all sides, but held its
railway line in safety. The wounded were left to the care of Smuts, who
other side of the line, acting entirely with Colonial troops, were
Boer surrender. Fouche gave himself up at Cradock on June 2nd.
in his rear, which was wrecked, together with some of the blockhouses
organised at Port Nolloth, and advanced along the railway line,
The history of the war during the African winter of 1901 has now
continued in arms. It must be confessed that this step may appear harsh
of the Transvaal and of the late Orange Free State were legitimate
each other so far as it is possible to trace it.

that a considerable force was coming down upon them, and that they
matter of fact the losses of the enemy seem to have been very small. The
who commanded upon the Natal frontier, had over 20,000 men under his
stopped to gather them up, and the force of the wave of invasion broke
It was upon this that the first force of the attack broke at midnight
a long one for the man who spends it at his ease, but how never-ending
their wounded attested the severity of the fight. So strange are the
of the day. Captain Rowley, who was in command, handled his men
with some badly needed supplies.
misty weather and incessant rain. Some of his force escaped between the

casualties of the force were far greater from falls than from bullets.
October 20th and proceeded south, crossing the course along which the
stuck, and it took some hours to get them all across. The Boer fire was
rest of the Buffs and of the Mounted Infantry were out upon the flanks
soldier who survived to describe it. With the low roar of a great
on them. With that extraordinary quickness to adapt their tactics to
groups of men around the guns there was not one who did not stand to
as he was he despatched a message back to Wools-Sampson, asking him to
separate small bodies of Buffs, none of which appears to have been
of condition, which caused the men to straggle and the movements to be
Benson was brought in by the ambulance, and used his dying breath in
Lindsay of the Scottish Horse, with seven other officers were among the
In order to make a consecutive and intelligible narrative, I will
prisoners. On the 10th he overwhelmed the Bethel commando by a similar
Rawlinson, and others were working. On the other hand there was one
with the column, and the Boers were driven off. There seems every reason
fell temporarily into the hands of the enemy. These guns, belonging to

twenty of Kritzinger’s men. It must be confessed that there seems some
as stern an encounter as any in the campaign. This was the action at
had fought in the Vlakfontein engagement--the Derbys, the 1st Scottish
the confusion and the uncertain light of early dawn there was no chance
slightly hit, the Adjutant wounded and dying, and men dead and wounded
were the criticisms to which they had been exposed. There are few
Two British columns had left Zeerust on October 17th, under Methuen and
the two guns of the 4th R.F.A., and held temporary possession of them,

clearing the country.

The fight was sharp while it lasted, but it ended in the repulse of
observer took his eyes from the dark clouds which shadowed every
The blockhouse system had been developed to a very complete extent
operations they were much aided by the South African Constabulary.
upon with justice as the real authors of their troubles.
indeed a revelation to see them after two years still making a stand
heliographic call for assistance, hurried with admirable promptitude to
News had come to British headquarters that Kaffir’s Kop, to the
was coming up from Bethlehem, De Wet withdrew his men after four hours’
The British columns there had just returned exhausted from a drive, but
distant Boers. Damant and his staff seem to have taken it for granted
standing. Nothing could exceed their gallantry. Gaussen their captain
up Scott’s squadron of Damant’s Horse, and both rode for the kopje.
In this action the Boers, who were under the command of Wessels,
courage and the cunning of our antagonist. The blockhouse line was being
outposts at the base of the southern declivity. It appears to have been
Claus was bearing.
Yeomen seem to have behaved very well. ‘Some brave gentlemen ran away at
their gun section round them. Reed, the sergeant-major, rushed at
evidence that their losses, though less than those of the British, were
Such was the short but vigorous campaign of De Wet in the last part of
a long succession of captures their forces were much reduced in numbers.
yards apart, and were connected by such impenetrable strands of wire
beginning of the year the south-east of the Transvaal and the north-east
with him, took twenty more. Among these was General Erasmus, who had
repeated successes it was to the Intelligence Department, so admirably
killed and twenty-three wounded were our losses in this most sanguinary
doubt that at least six months would have been taken from the duration
Trichardt gave no very decisive result, but a piece of luck befell
one occasion covering seventy miles in a single day. Nothing further of
together had put in a great deal of useful work in the northern
that we, who held back our admirable and highly disciplined Sikhs and

corps, named the Bushveld Carbineers, had been operating. It was raised
sentenced to death, while another, Picton, was cashiered. Handcock and
from the Lancashire Fusiliers, Warwicks, and Derbys, most of whom had
up next day, and the enemy were driven out of the hills.
the south. At the end of March a considerable number had reinforced the
with the expedition as far as Holspruit, the farm which they had started
saddles as they broke through the ranks. The British had hardly time
excellent discipline of the overmatched troopers prevented the
six hundred rifles, so that the action at Holspruit is one which adds
which had attained such mobility that 150 miles were performed in three
strongly blockhoused and barbed-wired, so that any force which was
South African Light Horse, the New Zealanders, and the Queensland
horsemen, flanked by a blockhouse line between Kroonstad and Lindley.
taken, 270 being the respectable total of the prisoners. Three or four
columns, the whole pack were full cry upon his heels once more. An
chain was frail and the links were not all carefully joined, but each
his men. The fight at this point was almost muzzle to muzzle, fifty or

were places traversed upon the Natal border where an alpen stock would
lines on the night of the 23rd. Most of the commando were Transvaalers,
is recorded that the angle which formed the apex of the drive was one
exceedingly energetic in that part, and several important actions had
From the 1st to the 4th of May a successful drive was conducted by many
opened on the advancing troops, who were clearly visible in the light
far away in the Vryheid district of the Transvaal. This was the

River Colony had caused this district to be comparatively neglected,
wounded fifteen, and captured forty. From Lichtenburg Lord Methuen
horses the Boer retreat was cut off, and the attack was so furiously
to 630 men. Colonel Anderson was in command. On the morning of Tuesday,
front, Fusiliers upon the flanks and rear. Suddenly the black bank of
of the enemy.
leaves no shadow of discredit on any officer or man among those who
It was important to regain the guns if possible, as they were always
and were in every way less reliable. It included a curious mixture of
skirmish which ensued that some of his Yeomanry were unreliable and

have been too much for the nerves of the unseasoned troopers. A panic
every man being killed or wounded, including Lieutenant Nesham, who
neighbouring kraal, and a small body of Cape Police and Yeomanry under
the British wounded, and Lord Methuen was sent under charge of his chief
the disaster in the Houses of Parliament. It was a fine example of
Kekewich, Walter Kitchener, Rawlinson, and Rochfort, with a number of
of blockhouses there was, it is true--the one called the Schoonspruit
Schoonspruit line. The plan was to march a British force right through
Rochfort’s troops, who had moved up from the Vaal. Above him from south
the Boers adopted extraordinary devices in order to escape from
troops had averaged from seventy to eighty miles in twenty-six hours
had moved out to a point about forty miles west of Klerksdorp. Forming
who fought a clever rearguard action, and covered their charge with
twenty-four Canadians and forty-five Mounted Infantry. They occupied no
which Colonel Keir had brought up. No progress whatever was made by the
Boers in breaking the British line. The fact that it was so makes it
fatal. Cookson’s force stood to arms all night until the arrival of
centre, he was manoeuvring his columns so as to swing them into line
roar of musketry and saw a lot of men galloping down on us.’ The British
his wounded burghers, ‘for he sjamboked me into the firing line this
Commonwealth Regiments gave a brilliant start to the military history
indeed sad that at this last instant a young life should be thrown
was steadily approaching. With mathematical precision the scientific
least two years of failure and experience are needed to turn a civilian

after all. After conferring with Lord Kitchener the Boer leaders upon
between surrender and a war which must finally exterminate them as a
‘the whole matter as an immense joke,’ and the unfortunate Steyn,
from Cape Town to the Zambesi, had been added to the British Empire. The
   3. That their liberty and property be inviolate.
situation as it was.
can but pray that it will last.
That the heavy losses caused us by the war were borne without a murmur
days which brought out the virtues of our race as nothing has done in
Zealand, the wiry South African irregulars--these are the Reserves whose
we are stricken with that disease which has killed every great empire
